Created: 2024-09-27T17:45:15.232315
Name: Committee_of_The_Whole_Appearance_Main_Estimates_Backpocket
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/c8ca6f4f-51d1-4ad9-9242-2ecba39c1096/resource/3c178d7c-beb3-4ec7-bae5-a2254b7b86fe/download/cotw-backpocket-eng.pdf
Package ID: c8ca6f4f-51d1-4ad9-9242-2ecba39c1096
Keywords: ['Health', 'committee', 'Main Estimates']
Notes: Committee of The Whole Appearance
Main Estimates Backpocket

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Committee of The Whole Appearance
Main Estimates Backpocket
May 29, 2024
Committee of the Whole- Main Estimates Appearance
BACKPOCKET – TABLE OF CONTENTS
May 29th, 2024
A – HOT ISSUE ONE PAGERS
1. Opioid Crisis
2. Dental Care
3. CHA Compliance/Abortion Access
4. Healthcare Funding/Bilateral Agreements to PTs Mental Health
5. MAID
6. Pharmacare (including Drugs for Rare Diseases and Canada Drug Agency)
7. Primary Care/health workforce challenges
8. Quebec Issues Sheet
9. Safe Long-Term Care Act
10. Forest Fires
C – QUESTION PERIOD NOTES
11. Sperm Donation
12. Thalidomide
D – TRANSFERS AND AGREEMENTS
13. PT Health Funding
E – HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
14. Health Workforce Capacity Indicators and Policy Implications
15. Backgrounder – PT Actions (Working Together Agreements)
F – PHARMACARE
16. Qs&As
17. News Release
18. Technical Deck
19. Backgrounder – Contraceptives
20. Backgrounder – Diabetes
ISSUE SHEET- OPIOIDS
Overdose Death Numbers and Trends
42,494 apparent opioid toxicity deaths between January 2016-September 2023
82% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths from January-September 2023 involving fentanyl
57% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths from January-September 2023 also involving a stimulant
80% of accidental stimulant toxicity deaths from January-September 2023 also involving an opioid
Death most common among males, and for both males and females aged 20-59 years old
From January-September 2023 – males account for 72% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths
From 2016 to September 2023, in youth (0-19), the total number of opioid and stimulant-related
poisoning hospitalizations among females was consistently higher compared to their male
counterparts (1,329 opioid-related and 1,647 stimulant-related hospitalizations among females
aged 0-19, compared to 973 and 954, respectively in males aged 0-19).
This is largely driven by intentional poisoning hospitalizations.
When looking only at accidental opioid- and stimulant-related poisoning hospitalizations among
youth, males have higher counts than females (653 opioid-related and 441 stimulant-related
hospitalizations among males aged 0-19, compared to 527 and 351, respectively, among females
aged 0-19).
Data points to people commonly dying of overdoses alone and mostly indoors.
In Ontario, from March to December of 2020, 73% of fatal opioid-related overdoses occurred where
no one was present to intervene.
In BC, in the first three months of 2024 (January-March), 84% of fatal overdoses occurred indoors,
more specifically, 47% occurred in private residences.
Majority (88%) of accidental opioid toxicity deaths from January-September 2023 occurred in: BC,
AB, ON.
Declaration of Emergrncies
P/T declarations:
British Columbia – Public Health Emergency – April 2016
Alberta – Public Health Crisis – May 2017
Yukon – Call to Action (Substance Use Health Emergency) – January 2022
In 2024 alone, emergency declarations have been made by the City of Belleville, ON, and several
First Nations communities across BC, AB, MB and ON.
Provincial Statistics
Alongside Ontario and Alberta , British Columbia continues to be one of the jurisdictions most
impacted by the overdose crisis; together, these three provinces represented 88% of all accidental
opioid toxicity deaths reported from January-September 2023.
BC
2,304 deaths in 2021
2,385 deaths in 2022
2,551 deaths in 2023
572 deaths so far in 2024 (January to March)
First Nations people in BC died of an overdose at 6.0 times the rate of other BC residents from
January-June 2023.
AB
1,634 opioid-related deaths in 2021
1,517 opioid-related deaths in 2022
1,706 opioid-related deaths from January to November of 2023
Edmonton – 608
Calgary – 581
In Alberta, First Nations people died of an accidental opioid overdose at seven times the rate of
other residents between January and June of 2020.
ON
2,857 opioid-related deaths in 2021
2,535 opioid-related deaths in 2022
659 opioid-related deaths from January to March 2023
In Ontario, in 2021, the rate of opioid-toxicity deaths among First Nations people was seven times
higher than the rate for non-First Nations people.
Impact on Healthcare System
Though these numbers have appeared to stabilize in recent years, since national surveillance
began 2018:
The percentage of all opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations that involved fentanyl and its
analogues has increased 100%
Compared to the two-year period before the pandemic (April 2018 – March 2020, 9,470
hospitalizations) there was a 24 percent increase in opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations in
Canada during the first two years of the pandemic (April 2020 – March 2022, 11,765
hospitalizations).
The percentage of all opioid-related poisoning emergency department visits that involved fentanyl
and its analogues has increased 120% since 2018 when national surveillance began
Federal Actions/ Funding
Since 2017, guided by the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS), the Government of
Canada has taken urgent action to address the overdose crisis and made significant investments of
over $1.1 billion. These commitments include $359.2 million announced through Budget 2023 to
support a renewed CDSS and $150 million through Budget 2024 for an Emergency Treatment Fund
to help municipalities and Indigenous communities provide rapid responses to emergent, critical
needs related to the overdose crisis. Canada’s approach recognizes that a full continuum of
strategies is necessary to address substance use-related harms and the overdose crisis and
includes efforts to:
improve access to treatment services;
increase access to harm reduction services, including supervised consumption sites;
support a range of innovative approaches to harm reduction, treatment, and prevention at the
community level;
strengthen law enforcement capacity to address illegal drug production and trafficking;
increase awareness and prevention efforts; and,
build the evidence base through investments in research and surveillance.
On February 7, 2023, the Government of Canada announced it will increase health funding to
provinces and territories by nearly $200 billion over 10 years, in order to improve Canada’s health
care system. This investment includes $25 billion for shared health priorities, including increasing
access to mental health and substance use services and supports and $2 billion for the Indigenous
Health Equity Fund to address unique challenges Indigenous Peoples face when it comes to fair
and equitable access to quality and culturally safe health care services. These commitments are in
addition to existing bilateral agreements with provinces and territories for health priorities,
including $5 billion over 10 years for Mental Health and Addictions that were put in place in 2017.
These investments will set the foundation for long-term, integrated and sustained health care
system change that builds on existing, targeted actions to address substance use-related harms
and the overdose crisis.
Prescribed Alternatives Pilot Programs
As of April 1, 2024, Health Canada is currently supporting 22 prescribed alternatives pilot projects
across Canada through the Substance Use and Addictions Program.
We are seeing some promising early outcomes.
These include reduced emergency department visits and hospitalizations. We are also hearing
reports from safer supply clients across multiple programs of reduced overdoses, illegal drug use,
and criminal activity.
Some providers and clients have described additional benefits, such as improvements in social
functioning, health and mental health, access to housing and income supports, and the time and
stability needed to pursue personal goals.
We will continue to monitor outcomes so that our response to the overdose crisis is evidence-
based and focussed on saving lives.
We are also aware of some concerns, such as diversion, and are committed to taking action where
necessary.
We are working with prescribed alternatives pilot projects to strengthen their approaches to
minimizing diversion risk.
Going forward, all prescribed alternatives pilot projects are required to meet new requirements
related to diversion mitigation, including patient intake and assessment, patient engagement,
operational and dosing protocols, and remedial actions, as well as additional reporting
requirements.
Diversion of drugs from safer supply programs is illegal.
Health Canada supports law enforcement actions to address drug trafficking and support
community safety, wherever it takes place.
We will continue to evaluate all available and emerging evidence in regard to prescribed
alternatives programs to understand the potential benefits and risks.
ISSUE SHEET – DENTAL
UNMET DENTAL CARE NEEDS
Access to quality oral health care is an integral part of overall health yet many Canadians face
barriers.
2.26 million school days are missed each year due to dental-related illness.
Tooth decay accounts for one-third of all day surgeries performed on children between the ages of
one and five in Canada1.
Much of the burden of dental disease is concentrated in disadvantaged children: those from low-
income families; Indigenous children; new immigrants; and children with special health care
needs.
In 2022, 55% of Canadians reported having dental expenses covered by private insurance, 4%
reported having only public dental insurance, and 35% (over a third) of Canadians reported not
having any dental insurance. Further, 40% of people without dental insurance reported having
avoided going to a dental professional due to the cost, nearly three times more than those with
private dental insurance (14%).
Canadians with financial resources or insurance are more likely to experience good oral health.
CURRENT DENTAL PROGRAMS IN CANADA
$18.4 billion was spent on dental services in 2022 :
95% was covered through private insurance or out-of-pocket spending;
40% was paid out-of-pocket
5% was covered through public sector spending (existing federal, provincial, and territorial plans).
PTs provide coverage for medically-necessary oral health services that take place in hospital and
offer some form of public dental coverage.
The federal government provides dental coverage for public servants, members of the Armed
Forces and veterans, people incarcerated in federal correctional facilities, some newcomers,
registered First Nations people and recognized Inuit.
FEDERAL ACTIONS / FUNDING
The interim Canada Dental Benefit (CDB) provides direct payments to eligible applicants of up to
$650 per child under 12 years old, per year and up to $1,300 over two years.
Budget 2023 proposed funding of $13.1 billion over five years starting in 2023-24, and $4.4 billion
ongoing, to implement the Canadian Dental Care Plan. It also proposed $250 million over three
years, starting in 2025-26, and $75 million ongoing to Health Canada to establish an Oral Health
Access Fund, which will address oral health gaps for vulnerable populations and reduce barriers to
accessing care, and $23.1 million over two years, starting in 2023-24 to support Dental Care Data.
CANADA DENTAL BENEFIT – interim measure
The CDB launched on December 1, 2022 and is administered by the Canada Revenue Agency
(CRA).
It represents the first step towards fulfilling the Government of Canada’s commitment to the
development of a long-term, Canada-wide dental care plan for low and middle income families.
Depending on adjusted family net income, the CDB provides a tax-free direct payment of $260,
$390, or $650 for each eligible child up to a maximum of two payments per child.
There are two benefit periods for the CDB. The first period ran from December 1, 2022 to June 30,
2023 and helped approximately 323,000 children get brighter smiles and healthy teeth.
Applications are currently being received for the second benefit period, which will run from July 1,
2023 to June 30, 2024. As of April 30, 2024, over 350,000 children have been helped during the
second benefit period.
CANADIAN DENTAL CARE PLAN (CDCP) – long-term measure
The Government of Canada launched the CDCP in December 2023 with the aim of improving
access to care as well as oral health outcomes for Canadian residents with adjusted family net
incomes below $90,000 annually and who do not have dental insurance.
Up to 9 million uninsured Canadian residents with an adjusted family net income under $90,000
could benefit from the CDCP.
To meet anticipated demand and ensure a smooth process, the CDCP is being rolled out using a
phased approach, starting with seniors. Automated phone applications were used by seniors aged
70 and above to apply for the CDCP, until it was decommissioned on April 30, 2024.
In May 2024, applications opened for eligible seniors 65 and older through an online portal. Adults
between 18 and 64 with a valid Disability Tax Credit certificate and children under the age of 18 will
be able to apply online as of June 2024. Finally, all remaining eligible Canadian residents between
the ages of 18 and 64 will be able to apply online in 2025.
On May 1, 2024, the first million seniors over 70 are able to access dental care under the plan and
oral health providers were able to submit their claims right away through the Sun Life CDCP claims
processing system.
Sun Life will continue to enrol 500,000 new members per month, along with participating oral
health providers.
An Oral Health Access Fund, led by Health Canada, will begin to provide grants and contributions
funding in 2025-26. It will complement the CDCP by supporting projects that further reduce access
barriers for Canada’s vulnerable populations (e.g. those living in rural and remote communities and
equity seeking groups, such as persons with disabilities).
ISSUE SHEET – CHA COMPLIANCE/ABORTION ACCESS
USE OF PRIVATE FACILITIES FOR DELIVERY OF INSURED SERVICES
Under the Canada Health Act (CHA), medically necessary hospital and physician services may be
provided in private facilities, so long as patients are not charged to access care.
Several PTs have been expanding the use of private facilities to deliver medically necessary services
to address the service backlogs.
PTs have used private facilities to deliver medically necessary services since the 1990’s and have
various mechanisms in place to ensure patients are not charged for their care.
FEDERAL ACTIONS / FUNDING
DEDUCTIONS AND REIMBURSEMENTS FROM CHT PAYMENTS FOR PATIENT CHARGES
Since 2015, the Government of Canada has levied close to $267 million in mandatory CHT
deductions to jurisdictions that allow patient charges for insured health services.
In March 2024, BC, ON, NB and NL faced mandatory CHT deductions for patient charges levied in
2021-2022 for insured health care services provided in private facilities. BC, AB, SK, MB, QC, NB,
and NS also faced mandatory deductions for patient charges levied in 2021-2022 for insured
diagnostic services received in private facilities (under the Diagnostic Services Policy).
Deductions are generally based on amounts of patient charges reported by PTs on an annual basis
to HC. If there is evidence that a PT has not reported accurately, HC is required to estimate the
amount of patient charges, based on the best evidence available.
HC was required to take deductions based on estimates for AB, SK, QC, NB, and NS.
BC, MB, ON, and NL reported amounts to HC and a deduction in the same amount was levied from
the province’s CHT.
PTs are eligible for reimbursement within two years of the date of deduction under the CHA’s
Reimbursement Policy if they choose to work with HC on a Reimbursement Action Plan and take
the necessary steps to eliminate patient charges, and the circumstances that led to them.
In March 2024, due to actions taken to curb patient charges, six provinces (BC, AB, MB, ON, QC,
and NL) were eligible for reimbursements totalling $90,072,387.
In instances where partial reimbursement was made to acknowledge actions taken by PTs to
eliminate patient charges, further reimbursement is possible, should the PT take additional
measures to eliminate these barriers to care.
The first deductions eligible for reimbursement under the policy were those taken in March 2018
and, since then, $175,010,504 in deductions have been reimbursed to provinces as a result of their
efforts to eliminate patient charges and the circumstances that led to them.
FOR ABORTION SERVICES
NEW BRUNSWICK
Deductions: $444,041 since March 2020.
Reimbursements: None to date.
Issue: Surgical abortion services are only insured under the NB health insurance plan if performed
in hospital; procedures provided in the private clinic in Fredericton, which closed in February 2024,
were not covered.
Status: Prior to the clinic’s closure, HC raised this issue with NB at the officials' and Ministerial
levels with no resolution. Given the retrospective nature of reporting under the CHA, NB still faces
deductions for patient charges levied in 2022-2023 and 2023-2024. NB deductions are informed by
a survey published by the Canadian Institute for Health Information, which provides volume data on
the services provided at the clinic. The most recent survey, released on March 21, 2024, is
expected to inform the March 2025 deduction amount.
ONTARIO
Deductions: $86,065 since March 2021.
Reimbursements: $43,296 in reimbursements to date.
Issue: A number of private abortion clinics in ON charge fees for uninsured services, while not
consistently informing patients these fees were optional to access insured surgical abortion
services.
Status: In recognition of ON’s Reimbursement Action Plan efforts, including the introduction of new
legislation in 2023, which is expected to eliminate these patient charges, HC has issued $43,296 in
partial reimbursements.
FOR SURGICAL SERVICES
BRITISH COLUMBIA
Deductions: $88,812,438 since March 2018.
Reimbursements: $74,839,233 in reimbursements to date.
Issue: A number of private surgical clinics in BC charge patients for insured surgical services.
Status: In recognition of BC’s Reimbursement Action Plan efforts, HC has issued $74,839,233 in
partial reimbursements.
NEWFOUNDLAND AND LABRADOR
Deductions: $79,667 since March 2019.
Reimbursements: $79,667 in reimbursements to date.
Issue: An ophthalmologist was charging patients for insured cataract surgeries.
Status: In recognition of NL’s Reimbursement Action Plan efforts to successfully eliminate these
patient charges, HC has issued full reimbursement totalling $79,667.
FOR DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES
BRITISH COLUMBIA
Deductions: $28,435,525 since March 2023.
Reimbursements: $24,170,197
(85% partial reimbursement).
ALBERTA
Deductions: $34,231,327 since March 2023.
Reimbursements: $20,538,796
(60% partial reimbursement).
SASKATCHEWAN
Deductions: $1,826,960 since March 2023.
Reimbursements: NIL.
MANITOBA
Deductions: $354,477 since March 2023.
Reimbursements: $354,477
(100% reimbursement).
QUEBEC
Deductions: $77,881,356 since March 2023.
Reimbursements: $46,728,814
(60% partial reimbursement).
NEW BRUNSWICK
Deductions: $3,072,294 since March 2023.
Reimbursements: NIL.
NOVA SCOTIA
Deductions: $3,072,294 since March 2023.
Reimbursements: NIL.
HEALTH CARE FUNDING
On February 7, 2023, the Government of Canada announced an investment of close to $200 billion
over 10 years, including $46.2 billion in new funding for provinces and territories to improve health
care services for Canadians; and, is committed to working with provinces and territories to ensure
these investments are used in ways that respect the principles of the Canada Health Act.
ISSUE SHEET – HEALTHCARE FUNDING / BILATERAL AGREEMENTS TO PTS
REGULAR SUPPORT TO PTs VIA CANADA HEALTH TRANSFERS (CHT)
2023-24 - $49.4 billion through the CHT (an increase of 9.3%)
$11 billion to Quebec
2024-25 - $52.1 billion through the CHT (an increase of 5.4%)
$11.5 billion to Quebec
CANADA DENTAL BENEFIT
Budget 2023 committed $13.0 billion over five years, starting in 2023-24, and $4.4 billion ongoing to
Health Canada to implement the Canadian Dental Care Plan to provide access to dental care for
more Canadians when they need it.
The interim measure will provide up to $650 annually (per child) for two years directly to families
who earn $90,000 or less, to pay for dental care for children under 12 years of age.
Coverage for qualifying seniors (aged 87 and above) began in December 2023 with coverage for the
remainder of the population commencing over the course of 2024 and 2025.
BUDGET 2023 – WORKING TOGETHER TO IMPROVE HEALTH CARE FOR CANADIANS
Close to $200 billion over ten years
$200.7 billion in increased health funding for PTs over 10 years, including $46.5 billion in new
funding. This funding includes:
An immediate, unconditional $2 billion top-up to the CHT (provided June 2023)
A 5 per cent CHT guarantee for the next five years, resulting in a permanent funding increase
(expected value of $17.5 billion over 10 years)
$25 billion over 10 years to support shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements
$1.7 billion over 5 years to support personal support workers and related professions
$350 million over ten years for the Territorial Health Investment Fund
$2 billion federal direct investment over 10 years to provide additional support for Indigenous
health priorities, and $505 million over five years to the Canadian Institute for Health Information,
Canada Health Infoway, and federal data partners
BILATERAL AGREEMENT FUNDING INCLUDED IN THE WORKING TOGETHER PLAN
Bilateral agreement funding included in the Working Together plan is being delivered to provinces
and territories through two distinct bilateral agreements:
1. Agreements to Work Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians
$25 billion over 10 years (Budget 2023) to support shared health priorities, including family health
services, health workers and backlogs, mental health and substance use, and modernized health
data systems
$2.4 billion over 4 years to improve access to mental health, substance use and addictions services
(Budget 2017)
2. Aging with Dignity Funding Agreements
$2.4 billion over 4 years to improve access to home and community care services (Budget 2017)
$3 billion over five years to improve the quality and safety of Long Term Care facilities (Budget 2021)
OTHER BILATERAL AGREEMENT SUPPORT
$150 million for 5 years (Budget 2018) – the Emergency Treatment Fund provides support to PTs to
help address the opioid crisis
$150 million to PTs for rapid deployment of virtual care services, and $50 million to Canada Health
Infoway to develop pan-Canadian standards on secure messaging and videoconferencing and
support PTs (part of the May 2020 $240.5 million announced to support virtual care and digital
tools)
$35 million over four years beginning in 2021-22 to PEI under the "Improving Affordable Access to
Prescription Drugs Program" to add new drugs to its list of covered drugs, and lower out of pocket
costs for drugs covered under existing public plans for Island residents.
$1 billion (2020 Fall Economic Statement) – Safe Long-term Care Fund
FUNDING FOR QUEBEC
As part of the Working Together federal funding plan first announced on February 7th 2023, Quebec
will receive an additional $11 billion over ten years over and above its regular CHT transfer:
approximately $6.7 billion through new tailored bilateral agreements and approximately $4.3 billion
through the 5% CHT growth guarantee and its share of the $2 billion CHT top-up.
This is all in addition to Quebec’s regular annual CHT allocation, which will flow $11 billion to
Quebec in 2023-24 and $11.5 billion in 2024-25.
Through the Emergency Treatment Fund bilateral agreement (expires March 31, 2023), Quebec
received $22 million to address harms and deaths associated with problematic substance use.
To help address long-standing and systemic challenges in Canada's long-term care (LTC) facilities,
Quebec received $221 million through the Safe Long-Term Care fund and is eligible to receive
$646M over 5 years through the Budget 2021 LTC investment to ensure that provinces and
territories can provide a high standard of care in their LTC facilities.
SAFE RESTART AGREEMENTS AND ADDITIONAL CHT FUNDING TO PTs
$19 billion – Safe Restart Agreement.
June 2023 - $2 billion one-time top-up to the CHT to address immediate health system pressures,
especially in pediatric hospitals and emergency rooms, and long wait times for surgeries.
July 2022 - $2 billion one-time top-up to the CHT to help address pandemic-related health system
pressures, including backlogs.
July 2021 - $5 billion
$4 billion – one-time top-up to CHT to clear backlog resulting from COVID.
$1 billion – to support vaccine roll-out
March 2020 - $500 million CHT top up to PTs for critical health care system needs
COVID-19 FUNDING
Between 2019 and 2028, the federal government estimates that federal health-related COVID-19
spending will total over $72 billion.
ISSUE SHEET – MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)
LEGISLATIVE TIMELINE FOR MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
March 2021: Former Bill C-7 removed the reasonably foreseeable natural death (RFND) eligibility
criterion, created a 2-track system of safeguards and temporarily excluded mental illness eligibility
until March 2023.
As required under former Bill C-7, the federal Ministers of Health and Justice initiated an
independent expert review on MAID and mental illness (Summer 2021). The Expert Panel on MAID
and Mental Illness tabled their final report in Parliament in May 2022.
A Special Joint Parliamentary Committee (AMAD) examined MAID where mental illness is the sole
underlying condition, and produced an interim report in June 2022.
Fall 2022: Concerns raised whether the health care system would be ready to safely assess MAID
requests where the sole underlying condition is a mental illness in March 2023.
Divergent opinions on level of readiness; recognized a great deal of progress made to prepare for
MAID requests; some PTs indicated to federal officials that they needed more time – this included
political opposition by AB, which was expressed publicly in the media.
Federal government also needed time to consider the recommendations of the AMAD final report,
published February 15, 2023.
March 2023: Former Bill C-39 delayed the lifting of the temporary exclusion of mental illness for
MAID eligibility for one year, until March 17, 2024.
Prudent approach to allow time for the dissemination and uptake of key resources (Model MAID
Practice Standards; MAID Training Curriculum) and other activities (Indigenous engagement;
enhanced data collection; oversight) to support health system preparedness.
October 18, 2023: Private Members Bill C-314 (CPC Ed Fast) was defeated at second reading in the
House of Commons. The Bill proposed to permanently eliminate MAID eligibility for people with
mental illness as a sole underlying medical condition.
Fall 2023: Among others, provinces and territories raised concerns about health care system
readiness by March 2024.
February 29, 2024: Bill C-62 received Royal Assent. It delays the lifting of the temporary exclusion
of mental illness for MAID eligibility for three years, until March 17, 2027. This delay allows more
time for the provinces and territories to prepare their health care systems and practitioners to
participate in training and become more familiar with available guidelines and supports.
RECENT PUBLIC POLLING ON MAID AND ON EXPANSION OF MAID FOR MENTAL ILLNESS
Majority of Canadians (64%) support the previous rules governing MAID, first passed in 2016 and
also when the law was updated in 2021 (60%) removing the requirement for a reasonably
foreseeable natural death.
There is more hesitation when it comes to the planned expansion for eligibility MAID for mental
illness in March 2024. Three-in-ten (28%) say they support allowing those whose sole medical
condition is mental illness to seek MAID, while half are opposed (50%). (Sept 2023 Angus Reid)
When asked whether an adult with the capacity to provide informed consent should be able to seek
an assessment for MAID, and if eligible, receive MAID, for a severe, treatment-resistant mental
disorder for which they experience intolerable suffering, 35% of Canadians surveyed strongly
supported, and 45% somewhat supported, (June 2023, Ipsos)
When surveyed, 41% of members of the Canadian Psychiatric Association (CPA) agreed or strongly
agreed when asked whether persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a mental disorder
should be considered for eligibility for MAID, while 39% disagreed or strongly disagreed and 20%
were undecided (October 2020)
In the same survey, when CPA members were asked if it is possible for a mental disorder to be
considered grievous and irremediable: 65% Agree or Strongly Agree; 25% Disagree or Strongly
Disagree; 12% Undecided (October 2020)
FEDERAL ANNUAL REPORTS ON MAID IN CANADA
New Data from the Fourth Annual Report
The total number of medically assisted deaths reported in Canada since the introduction of federal
MAID legislation in 2016 is 44,958.
In 2022, there were a total of 13,241 MAID provisions reported in Canada, accounting for 4.1% of all
deaths in Canada. This number includes both RFND (12,778 individuals) and non-RFND (463
individuals) (This falls within the range experienced in other jurisdictions with similar assisted dying
regimes (Belgium, 2.5% in 2022; Netherlands, 5.1% in 2022)
The number of cases of MAID in 2022 represents a growth rate of 31.2% over 2021. All provinces
except Manitoba and the Yukon continued to experience a steady year-over-year growth in 2022.
The average age of individuals at the time MAID was provided in 2022 was 77.0 years which is
slightly higher than the averages of 2019 (75.2), 2020 (75.3) and 2021 (76.3).
Similar to all other years, Cancer (63.0%) remains the most cited underlying medical condition
among MAID provisions in 2022. This is followed by cardiovascular conditions (18.8%), other
conditions (14.9%), respiratory conditions (13.2%) and neurological conditions (12.6%).
In 2022, 3.5% of the total number of MAID provisions (463 individuals), were individuals whose
natural deaths were not reasonably foreseeable (non-RFND). This is an increase from 2.2% in 2021
(223 individuals). Non-RFND MAID provisions account for about 0.1% of all deaths in Canada.
The most cited underlying medical condition for non-RFND MAID cases was neurological (50.0%),
followed by other conditions (37.1%), and multiple comorbidities (23.5%), which is similar to 2021
results.
The average age of non-RFND individuals receiving MAID was 73.1 years, slightly higher than 70.1 in
2021 but lower than the average age of 77.0 for all MAID recipients in 2022.
In 2022, MAID practitioners reported that the majority of MAID recipients (77.6%) had received
palliative care, a level similar to the three previous years.
In 2022, 560 individuals were assessed as ineligible for MAID. The reason for a determination of
ineligibility varies depending on whether an individual’s death was reasonably foreseeable or not
reasonably foreseeable.
The main reason for ineligibility for individuals whose natural death was reasonably foreseeable
was that the individual was not deemed capable of making decisions with respect to their health
(41.3%), consistent with previous years.
For individuals whose natural death was not reasonably foreseeable, the main reasons for a finding
of ineligibility were not having a serious illness, disease, or disability (54.4%), not being in an
advanced state of decline (54.0%) and not having intolerable suffering (45.1%).
KEY CONCERNS RELATED TO EXPANSION
Some of the concerns expressed either in the media or from stakeholder groups opposed to the
expansion focus on:
Defining grievous and irremediable in the context of a mental illness
Distinguishing between a request for MAID and suicidal ideation
Need for guidelines and standards for consistent practice of MAID
Education and training tools for assessors and psychiatrists
Data collection and evidence gathering to help evaluate MAID implementation
The impact of the expansion on suicide prevention
The impact on health systems and health care (i.e. human resources/access to mental health
supports/wait times)
PROVINCIAL-TERRITORIAL PREPAREDNESS ACTIVITIES FOR EXPANSION
creating specific teams to support complex case assessments (i.e., clinical consultation/review), a
process that supports the objectives of prospective oversight
developing / refining retrospective oversight mechanisms (i.e., reviewing cases after MAID delivery)
adding resources (e.g. health workforce) to support navigation / assessment or leveraging
resources in other jurisdictions where requests/provisions are low
encouraging training using the newly launched nationally accredited MAID training curriculum to
help clinicians in addressing requests for more complex MAID cases, including where mental
illness is the sole underlying medical condition.
updating MAID practice standards, many referencing the Model MAID Practice Standard
At the recent October 2023 Health Ministers Meeting, PT Ministers (BC, NU, SK, NB, NWT)
unanimously expressed concerns about preparedness for March 2024 (citing inadequate time to
implement operational processes and perceived challenges with system capacity, especially as it
relates to mental health supports/services). Quebec passed legislation in June 2023 prohibiting
mental disorder as an eligible medical condition for MAID eligibility.
In a letter dated January 29, 2024, a majority of PT Ministers of Health indicated that they would
continue to support practitioners in meeting their legislative requirements and responsibilities, and
enact appropriate guidance and practices in accordance with the MAID legislative framework.
However, they clearly indicated that more time is needed to put the necessary measures in place to
address capacity concerns that are expected to result from the expansion of MAID eligibility and the
need to assess more complex cases.
FEDERAL ACTIONS
The Government of Canada has supported valuable work towards preparing for the expansion in
March 2024. This work has gone a long way to addressing many but not all of the concerns
expressed by those opposed to MAID expansion.
Release of a Model Practice Standard for MAID (March 2023): provides regulatory bodies and
clinicians with advice on the assessment of complex MAID requests, including persons with a
mental disorder as their sole medical condition. An Advice to the Profession document provides a
series of questions and responses which elaborate upon specific clinical questions raised by the
Model Standard including assessing incurability and differentiating between a request for MAID and
suicidal ideation.
While some PT regulatory bodies have successfully implemented practice standards developed by
an independent task group made up of clinical, regulatory and legal experts into their guidance
documents for clinicians (i.e., AB, NS, NL, ON), others are in the process of reviewing and updating
their existing standards (i.e., BC, MB, SK, NB, NWT). Still others have indicated that they have not
made any advancements on this front.
Knowledge Exchange Workshops (June 2023): Health Canada funded a Knowledge Exchange
Workshop held in Montreal, bringing together over 40 MAID practitioners and psychiatrists from
each jurisdiction to discuss roles and responsibilities for assessing and managing requests based
solely on mental disorder, and how to support local training related to MAID for mental disorders. A
subsequent workshop held in Toronto (September 2023) supported discussions on planning and
coordination to support MAID assessors/providers and those requesting MAID.
Launch of MAID Curriculum (August-Sept 2023): Launch of a nationally accredited, bilingual
Canadian MAID Curriculum (developed by the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and
Providers-CAMAP) gives practitioners (those new to MAID practice and those with experience)
important information, guidance and tools to improve their assessment skills.
As of March 31 , 2024, over 1,304 physicians and nurse practitioners (including over 208
psychiatrists) have registered to have access to the curriculum.
Approximately 960 clinicians and others have completed at least one of the seven modules,
including over 130 clinicians completing modules on MAID assessment and provision and almost
100 completing the module on MAID and mental disorder. Feedback has been positive.
Since the curriculum was launched in August 2023, 45 facilitated sessions will have been offered
in eight jurisdictions (BC, AB, SK, MB, ON, QC, NS, NL) by May , 2024. CAMAP is also developing
system coordination guides, patient journey maps and clinical assessment tools for complex cases
including where mental illness is involved.
Indigenous Engagement (ongoing)
The Government of Canada has launched a three year engagement process on MAID to hear the
perspectives of First Nations, Inuit and Métis, including urban Indigenous people, Indigenous
people living off-reserve, Indigenous people living with disabilities, and Two-Spirit, LGBTQQIA+ and
gender-diverse Indigenous people.
The engagement takes a two-pillar approach through both Indigenous-led and Health Canada-led
engagement activities. Since 2022, over $3.3M has been invested with Indigenous organizations to
lead engagement within their communities on MAID and/or palliative and end-of-life care.
Health Canada is supporting with engagement activities including an online survey open until June
30, 2024, and a suite of 21 national knowledge exchange roundtables, led by an Indigenous-owned
firm, that took place between February and April 2024 in seven locations across Canada and
virtually.
Health Canada provided an official update to Parliament on Indigenous engagement on MAID in
March 2024.
ISSUE SHEET- PHARMACARE INITIATIVES
PHARMACARE ACT
On February 29, 2023, the federal government introduced Bill C-64: An Act respecting pharmacare
(Pharmacare Act), which proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national
universal pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with
provinces and territories (PTs) to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of
contraception and diabetes medications.
If passed, Bill C-64 will:
Set the federal government’s framework to guide its efforts with partners to improve prescription
drug accessibility, affordability, universal coverage and appropriate use, for all Canadians.
Formalize a requirement to work collaboratively with provinces and territories and Indigenous
peoples to build national universal pharmacare through a step-by-step approach.
Outline the Government’s intent to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a range of
contraception and diabetes medications through collaborative arrangements with willing provinces
and territories.
Support the development of a national formulary of essential prescription drugs and related
products and the development of a national bulk purchasing strategy, to be led by Canada’s Drug
Agency.
Establish a committee of experts to make recommendations on the operation and financing of
national, universal, single-payer pharmacare in Canada.
In Budget 2024, the Government of Canada announced $1.5 billion over 5 years to support the
launch of national pharmacare and coverage for contraception and diabetes medications.
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND (PEI) INITIATIVE
On August 11, 2021, the Government of Canada announced the signing of the first agreement with
the Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI) to inform the advancement of national pharmacare.
Through this agreement, PEI will receive $35 million in federal funding, to:
add new drugs to its list of covered drugs, and
lower out of pocket costs for drugs covered under existing public plans for Island residents.
The Government of Canada will use early lessons from PEI’s efforts to inform its ongoing work to
advance national universal pharmacare.
Since January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to more than 100 new medications to treat a variety
of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine, and multiple sclerosis.
Effective June 1, 2023, PEI expanded its provincial drug coverage to reduce co-pays to $5 for almost
60% of medications regularly used by Islanders and removed barriers to the High-Cost Drug
Program making it available to all income levels. As of December, 2023, Islanders have saved over
$2.0 million in out-of-pocket costs on more than 230,000 prescriptions under the $5 co-pay
program.
PEI also lowered the cap on the amount of money a household spends on eligible medications
under the Catastrophic Drug Program as of July 1, 2023.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the launch of the first-ever National
Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, supported by investments of up to $1.5 billion over three
years. This first phase aims to increase access to and affordability of effective drugs for rare
diseases, which will contribute to improving the health of patients across Canada.
As part of the overall investment, the federal government will make available up to $1.4 billion over
three years to provinces and territories to improve access to new and emerging drugs, as well as to
support enhanced access to existing drugs, early diagnosis, and screening for rare diseases.
Similarly, to ensure that First Nations and Inuit patients living with rare diseases also benefit, the
Government is providing up to $33 million over the first three years to support eligible First Nations
and Inuit clients through Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
The Federal Government is also making key investments of a total of up to $68 million for various
initiatives to be led by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH), the
Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) to advance the collection and use of evidence to support decision making and critical rare
disease research.
Health Canada is now working with provinces and territories on bilateral agreements, starting with
jointly determining a small set of new and emerging drugs that would be cost-shared and covered in
a consistent way across the country. Constructive discussions between federal, provincial, and
territorial officials are continuing.
CADTH/CIHI are making progress on six key activities to support decision-making across the
pharmaceutical lifecycle, including completing needs assessments with stakeholders and
provinces and territories, drafting of criteria to guide analysis of disease registries, and establishing
and launching advisory structures and panels in keys areas of patient registries and newborn
screening.
CIHR launched four funding opportunities between June and August 2023. The recipient of the
largest of these opportunities was announced in February 2024, and includes $20M over 5 years to
the Maternal Infant Child and Youth Research Network (MICYRN) to create RareKids-CAN – a
Pediatric Rare Disease Clinical Trials and Treatment Network. Funding is expected to start flowing
for the remaining three projects beginning in spring 2024.
Health Canada continues work to establish national governance structures, including the launch of
a patient and stakeholder Implementation Advisory Group (IAG) in October 2023. Comprised of
individuals drawn from a range of perspectives and roles, including patients, caregivers, clinicians,
and industry, the IAG will be central to keeping patients at the centre of the Strategy as Health
Canada moves through Strategy implementation.
CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY (CDA)
On December 18, 2023, the Government announced that it will proceed with the creation of the
Canadian Drug Agency (CDA), built from the existing Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH) and in partnership with provinces and territories (PTs). The CDA will provide the
dedicated leadership and coordination needed to make Canada's drug system more sustainable
and better prepared for the future, helping Canadians achieve better health outcomes. The
Government is investing $89.5 million over five years to establish the CDA, in addition to the
existing federal funding of $34.2 million annually to support CADTH. CADTH officially launched as
Canada’s Drug Agency on May 1, 2024.
This announcement follows more than two years of extensive consultation that included over 400
meetings and roundtables with a broad range of stakeholders, including: provinces and territories,
patients, insurers, pharmaceutical companies, prescribers and academics.
Informed by extensive consultations – including over 400 meetings and roundtables with
stakeholders, provinces and territories – the CDA builds on CADTH's existing mandate and
functions (health technology assessment, post-market safety and effectiveness), expanding to
include new work streams:
Improving the appropriate prescribing and use of medications, for better patient health and to
support system sustainability;
Increasing pan-Canadian data collection and expanding access to drug and treatment data,
including real-world evidence data, to better support patients, inform health decisions and enable
robust system data analytics; and
Reducing drug system duplication and lack of coordination that causes expensive inefficiencies
and pressures.
The CDA will also support critical activities outlined in the pharmacare bill, including development
of an initial list of essential medicines to inform development of a national formulary, and a national
bulk purchasing plan.
NATIONAL FORMULARY
As set out in Bill C-64, Canada’s Drug Agency will be asked by the Minister of Health prepare a list of
essential prescription drugs and related products This list would be a starting point for partners to
consider which pharmaceutical products should be included under national universal pharmacare.
It would also help set out parameters for future bilateral agreements with PTs.
Upon completion of this list, the Minister must initiate discussions with PTs, Indigenous peoples
and other partners and stakeholders with the aim of continuing to work toward the first phase of
national universal pharmacare.
The steps outlined in Bill C-64 build on previous work to advance the development of a national
formulary.
In June 2022, following broad consultations, a multidisciplinary national panel established to
develop a draft formulary framework released its final report.
The panel recommended:
guiding principles;
a staged approach, including a proposed sample list of commonly prescribed drugs and related
products for three common conditions (heart disease, diabetes, mental health)
other key elements such as a deliberative process to select and evaluate products and an appeal
process
The panel’s work was overseen by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health
(CADTH), at the request of Health Canada.
The panel was composed of 2 co-chairs and 12 members. Its members were recruited from across
Canada and represented diversity across gender, culture, and race. The panel brought together a
range of expertise and experience, including health care providers (nursing, pharmacy, and
medicine), persons with lived and living experience, and individuals with backgrounds in ethics and
health policy.
ISSUE SHEET – PRIMARY CARE
ACCESS TO A REGULAR HEALTHCARE PROVIDER
In national surveys between 2019 and 2021 (from the Canadian Institute of Health Information
(CIHI)), about 88% of Canadians aged 12 and over reported having a regular healthcare provider,
with approximately 12% of Canadians reporting not having one , . This is similar to the Statistics
Canada figure of approximately 14% of Canadians without a regular health care provider, but with
Quebec excluded from the national average.
Based on CIHI data, the highest percentage of the population who reported having access to a
regular healthcare provider were in Ontario and New Brunswick (both at about 90%), with only
about 10% reporting not having one in these provinces.
Canadians in Nunavut (24%) and Northwest Territories (52%) reported the lowest rates of having a
regular healthcare provider .
For the remainder of the provinces and territories, Canadians reported access to a regular
healthcare provider ranging between 81% to 88%, with 12% to 19% of the population in these PTs
indicating that they do not have one.
Recently, the Commonwealth Fund Survey indicated that in 2023, 86% of Canadians (the lowest
rate across surveyed countries) had a doctor or place they usually go to for medical care, which
shows a declining trend from 93% in 2016 and 90% in 2020.
While the Commonwealth Fund Survey indicates a significant decline from 2016 to 2023 in
Canadians having access to a doctor or place they usually go to for medical care, data from
Statistics Canada indicates a relatively stable trend, with 84.2%-86% of Canadians reporting having
a regular health provider over roughly the same time period.
WAIT TIMES FOR NON-URGENT HEALTH NEEDS
Among Canadians who had a regular healthcare provider, 58.3% reported waiting three days or less
to see them or another provider from the same office for a minor problem in 2021 .
Manitoba (61.3%), Saskatchewan (62.6%), Ontario (65.3%), Alberta (66.3%), and Nunavut (72.4%)
had the highest percentage of its population being able to see their regular healthcare provider
within three days.
In contrast, Nova Scotia (31.9%) and New Brunswick (38.3%) had the lowest proportion being able
to see their regular healthcare provider within three days.
ACCESS FOR UNDERSERVED POPULATIONS
Indigenous Peoples:
Indigenous people have experienced long-standing health disparities compared to the non-
Indigenous population , including issues with access to health care that have likely worsened with
severe shortages of primary health care physicians across Canada.
In 2017-2020 , 20.3% of First Nations people living off-reserve, 17.9% of Métis, and 56.5% of Inuit
across Canada reported being without a regular health care provider.
Regionally, access to a regular health care provider was lowest in the territories and highest in
Ontario among First Nations people living off-reserve and Métis.
Rural Communities:
In 2021, 17.8% of Canadians lived in rural communities , but they were served (in 2022) by 12.8% of
family medicine physicians practicing in Canada.
FEDERAL ACTIONS / FUNDING
Budget 2023 outlined the federal government’s plan for Working Together to Improve Health Care
for Canadians, which provides close to $200 billion over ten years in health transfers to provinces
and territories.
his plan includes $25 billion in new funding through tailored bilateral agreements with provinces
and territories to address four shared health priorities:
expanding access to family health services;
supporting health workers and reducing backlogs;
increasing mental health and substance use support; and,
modernizing health systems through standardized health data and digital tools.
Bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible and provinces and territories have options to tailor
their respective Action Plans in response to the unique needs of their populations and geography.
The Government has now signed bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to begin
delivering the $25 billion in new funding available in the ten-year health care plan.
Agreements and action plans are available online from the Government of Canada and provinces
and territories will provide annual progress updates to their residents
Through the bilateral agreements, PTs are directly investing in expanding access to family health
care services, including with many focusing on leveraging federal funding to strengthen team-based
care. For example:
AB is providing stimulus funding for team-based care through its Modernizing Alberta’s Primary
Health Care System (MAPS) initiative;
ON is creating additional interdisciplinary primary care teams, with a focus on communities with
the greatest needs;
NS is strengthening the role of community-based primary health centers and expanding Primary
Care Clinics, Urgent Treatment Centres, and community pharmacy primary care clinics; and
PEI is establishing up to 30 patient medical homes across the province, which are collaborative
team-based models of primary care.
In parallel to these direct investments, complementary investments through other shared health
priorities will also play a key role in strengthening primary care.
Investments to support health workers will improve primary care by ensuring the appropriate
resources are available to deliver timely access to family health services, including through team-
based models of care.
Investments focused on modernizing health systems through digital tools and health data will help
strengthen the coordination and integration of primary care and drive efficiencies of how care is
delivered.
Supporting the Health Workforce: HHR Work Underway:
Budget 2024 proposes to provide $77.1 million over four years, starting in 2025-26, to address
critical health human resource supply challenges. This funding will support the integration of IEHPs
into Canada’s health workforce by reducing barriers and addressing critical gaps in training
opportunities. Funding will create 120 medical residency training positions, increase capacity to
support accelerated licensure processes and get IEHPs working more quickly and provide support
to help IEHPs navigate credential recognition systems.
On October 12, 2023, FPT Ministers of Health issued a public statement reaffirming their
commitment to supporting Canada’s health workforce so our health workers are able to provide
high-quality, accessible, and effective health services for people living in Canada. In particular, FPT
governments committed to concrete actions focusing on:
Retention, reducing rates of stress and burnout and improving workplace culture, flexibility, and
wellness so health workers can stay in their jobs;
Domestic education supply and demand, enhancing Canada’s capacity to produce a domestic
supply of key health professionals, including more training opportunities for Indigenous Peoples
that meets national demand for care and keeps pace with a growing and aging population;
Foreign credential recognition and ethical recruitment, making Canada a country of choice for
health care providers by reducing the time it takes for internationally educated health professionals
(IEHPs) to join our workforce;
Labour mobility, supporting an agile and flexible workforce to support access to care; and
Health workforce data and planning, improving the availability, sharing and standardization of
health workforce data to support health workforce planning.
In order to advance these priorities, the Government of Canada is taking action, including:
Focusing efforts on retaining our health workforce through the creation of the “Nursing Retention
Toolkit: Improving the Working Lives of Nurses in Canada”, released on March 4, 2024, and the
Nursing Retention Forum.
Funding the creation of Health Workforce Canada, a partnership with the Canadian Institute for
Health Information that will lead a collaborative pan-Canadian approach to improve data
collection, analysis, knowledge mobilization and policy advice.
Funding a study of the education and training supply and demand for key healthcare professions to
identify the best pan-Canadian approaches to meet future healthcare demands for Canadians over
the next decade, including misalignment across regions and settings.
On November 1, 2022, the Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health
Workers. The Coalition’s efforts are focused on identifying approaches to drive pan-Canadian
action and progress on policy implementation, informed by real world perspectives. The Coalition
is comprised of representatives from key groups, including nurses, doctors, personal support
workers, colleges and universities, patients, and equity-seeking communities.
ISSUE SHEET – QUEBEC (QC)-RELATED ISSUES
BILATERAL HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENT
Issue and Current Status
All provinces and territories, including QC, signed bilateral agreements by the March 31, 2024
deadline, enabling them to access funding under the Working Together to Improve Health Care for
Canadians plan.
All provinces and territories, including QC, signed bilateral agreements by the March 31, 2024
deadline, enabling them to access funding under the Working Together to Improve Health Care for
Canadians plan.
A total of 26 agreements were signed (two per jurisdiction – Working Together and Aging with
Dignity)
Background
The Government of Canada committed to flexible and tailored bilateral agreements, so that
provinces and territories, including QC, can address the unique needs of their populations, and
report on progress to their residents.
QC is eligible to receive an estimated $6.7 billion over 10 years through the Working Together and
Aging with Dignity agreements.
Through the Canada-Quebec Agreement on Federal Funding to Support Quebec’s Health Priorities
(2023-24 to 2026-27), QC is receiving $2.5 billion over 4 years to improve access to family health
teams, reduce surgical and diagnostic backlogs, accelerate digital health, and strengthen mental
health and social services.
Through the Canada-Quebec Agreement on Federal Funding to Support Home and Community
Care and Long-term Care (2023-24 to 2027-28), QC is receiving ~$1.2 billion over 5 years to improve
access to home and community care, and improve safety and quality of life for LTC residents.
The Government of Canada committed to flexible and tailored bilateral agreements, so that
provinces and territories, including QC, can address the unique needs of their populations, and
report on progress to their residents.
Responsive Lines
As planned, bilateral agreements were signed with every province and territory fiscal year 2023-24
and are providing all provinces and territories with the resources needed to support health care
improvements.
Like other provinces and territories, QC has developed plans outlining how federal funds will help
advance the shared priorities outlined in the Working Together to Improve Health Care for
Canadians plan.
We will continue to work with provinces and territories on the implementation of these agreements,
including the public reporting of progress and improvements.
PHARMACARE AND DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Issue and Current Status
On March 22, 2023, the federal government announced the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases (the National Strategy). On February 29, 2024, the federal government introduced Bill C-
64, An Act respecting pharmacare (Pharmacare Act).
In Budget 2024, the Government of Canada announced $1.5 billion over 5 years to support the
launch of national pharmacare and coverage for contraception and diabetes medications.
QC has publicly stated its position that it will seek to opt out from any national strategy related to
pharmacare with full compensation and without conditions.
Background
The National Strategy was announced on March 22, 2023. It aims to increase access to, and
affordability of, effective drugs for rare diseases to improve the health of patients across Canada,
including children.
As part of the overall investment under the National Strategy, the Government of Canada will make
available up to $1.4 billion to provinces and territories over the next three years through bilateral
agreements. This funding will help provinces and territories improve access to new and emerging
drugs and support enhanced access to existing drugs, early diagnosis, and rare diseases screening.
Health Canada and PT officials (QC as an observer) have been making progress in discussions to
finalize a framework for bilateral agreements.
QC announced a policy on rare diseases in 2022, and a four-year action plan and associated
funding of $17.2 million in spring 2023.
Bill C-64, the Pharmacare Act, proposes foundational principles for the first phase of national
universal pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with
provinces and territories to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception
and diabetes medications.
As outlined in Bill C-64, there is a commitment to maintaining long-term funding for the provinces,
territories, and Indigenous peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products.
QC has indicated its desire to opt out unconditionally, with full financial compensation, from the
National Strategy as well as any national pharmacare plan.
Responsive Lines
The federal government understands QC has its own public drug plan and the integral role that the
Institut national d'excellence en santé et services sociaux (INESSS) plays in the appropriate use
and evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of medicines.
The Government of Canada welcomes future conversations with QC, and all provinces and
territories, on the topic of national pharmacare.
The Government of Canada also welcomes discussions with QC, and all provinces and territories,
about building on existing efforts and delivering the benefits of the National Strategy for Drugs for
Rare Diseases for all patients with rare diseases, including those living in QC.
When it comes to affordable access to medications, all patients, including those residing in QC,
can benefit from collaboration.
DENTAL CARE
Issue and Current Status
The phased rollout of the Canadian Dental Care Plan (CDCP) is underway in all jurisdictions,
including QC.
More than 1.8M seniors aged 70 and older have applied and are deemed eligible for CDCP, with
more than 500K in QC.
As of May 1, the first one million eligible applicants across Canada can now access coverage under
the CDCP. The next 500,000 eligible applicants will have access to coverage starting on June 1, and
more will be added each month.
Seniors aged 65 years and older are now able to apply to the CDCP using the online application.
Children under 18 and adults with a valid disability tax credit certificate will be able to use the
online application to apply for enrolment beginning in June.
QC has requested to opt out of the CDCP, pending negotiations on the terms. Health Canada is
continuing to engage with QC at the Deputy Minister level to promote short-term cooperation as the
CDCP is rolled out, while being open to discussions regarding opt-out over the longer term.
Background
The CDCP aims to help ease financial barriers to accessing oral health care services and provide
coverage for eligible Canadian residents without access to dental insurance. It is intended to
complement existing PT dental programs and fill gaps in coverage for those programs.
The CDCP continues to be rolled out across Canada, including in QC, and is administered with the
support of the contracted service provider, Sun Life.
Prior to the launch of the CDCP, all provinces and territories were provided with the opportunity to
opt out of federal delivery with compensation, providing they implement a comparable plan and
meet certain terms and conditions. QC requested to opt out but rejected these terms.
The QC Assemblée nationale has voted unanimously for QC to opt out with full compensation with
no conditions. QC’s Budget 2024-25 also cites opting out of the CDCP with full compensation as a
measure to help balance the QC budget, indicating that the province intends to use funds from any
opt-out to offset its existing expenditures on QC dental programs.
Responsive Lines
The CDCP is being rolled out in all thirteen jurisdictions simultaneously and we are committed to
working with provinces and territories and oral health care professionals to ensure that Canadians
continue to have access to affordable, accessible, and essential oral health care.
The Government of Canada wants to ensure that Quebecers, like other Canadians, are able to
benefit from increased access to oral health care to the greatest extent possible, starting with
seniors this month.
Health Canada continues its dialogue with QC to ensure equal access to dental care for Quebecers
aimed not only at improving their oral health, but their overall health too.
CANADA HEALTH ACT
Issue and Current Status
QC historically has not recognized the CHA or the federal government’s authority under the Act. QC
remains committed to its position that health care falls exclusively under provincial jurisdiction.
Deductions from QC’s Canada Health Transfer were levied in March 2023 ($41,867,224) and in
March 2024 ($36,014,132) for patient charges for medically necessary diagnostic services at private
clinics, which are not permitted under the CHA’s Diagnostic Services Policy.
Recognizing the province has taken some action to improve access to publicly insured diagnostic
services, a partial reimbursement to QC was also recently made (March 2024) for these deductions
($46,728,814). QC could be eligible for additional reimbursement if it takes further action to
eliminate patient charges. Health Canada continues to engage with the province to encourage
them to do so.
Background
Following Health Canada engagement with QC, the province provided the Department with
information on how Bill 15 and contracting out with private clinics, including diagnostic clinics, will
help improve access to publicly insured health services. This information fulfilled the requirement
for a Reimbursement Action Plan under the CHA’s Reimbursement Policy. The province was
informed that, in light of progress made to eliminate patient charges, they were eligible for a partial
reimbursement (60%) of their March 2023 and March 2024 deductions.
On March 11, QC officials were notified by Finance Canada of deduction ($36,014,132) and
reimbursement ($46,728,814) amounts, which were subsequently applied to the March 18 and
March 20 Canada Health Transfers to the province. QC was also informed further reimbursement
could be possible if it took additional actions to eliminate patient charges.
Responsive Lines
I am pleased that QC has made strides to increase public access to needed care, including
diagnostic services, which helps protect patients from being charged for these services.
Due to the efforts made by QC to improve access to publicly funded diagnostic services, Health
Canada made a partial reimbursement of the province’s March 2023 and March 2024 deductions
under the CHA’s Reimbursement Policy, totalling more than $46 million.
The objective of the CHA is not to levy penalties but to ensure patients do not have pay to access
medically required care. Health Canada continues to work with QC to encourage them to eliminate
patient charges for medically necessary services, which would allow the province to be reimbursed
for the remainder of its March 2023 and 2024 deductions.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)
Issue and Current Status
In June 2023, the QC National Assembly passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting end-of-
life care and other legislative provisions which created a provincial regime to permit advance
requests for MAID (to come into force on a date set by the provincial government that can be no
later than June 7, 2025).
QC has requested the federal government explore options to remove legal barriers and permit
implementation of its advance request regime – most recently through a QC National Assembly
motion passed in February 2024 requesting the federal Parliament amend the Criminal Code.
Background
The Criminal Code does not permit MAID based on an advance request because it requires that a
person be experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering and be able to provide consent
immediately before MAID is provided, with limited exception. With an advance request, a person
would make a request for MAID before they are experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering, and
receive MAID after they have lost capacity to consent.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) reviewed advance requests as one of several topics
addressed in its report tabled in February 2023. AMAD recommended that the Government of
Canada amend the Criminal Code to allow for advance requests following a diagnosis of a serious
and incurable medical condition, disease, or disorder leading to incapacity. The federal
government’s response to the report notes further consultation and study is required; no
commitments are made to expanding federal legislation.
Responsive Lines
We are aware there is strong support among the public for advance requests, particularly for
persons diagnosed with capacity-limiting diseases like Alzheimer’s. However, we have also heard
that practitioners place a great deal of value on obtaining a “final consent” as confirmation of a
person’s wishes.
Amending the Criminal Code to permit advance requests would be a complex undertaking and first
require a great deal of consultation and study with provinces and territories, experts, and health
care stakeholders.
The Government of Canada remains open to discussing the issue of advance requests with
provinces and territories.
ISSUE SHEET – SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT
KEY FACTS ON LONG-TERM CARE
At the peak of the first wave, outbreaks in long-term care (LTC) and seniors’ homes accounted for
81% of deaths in Canada. This proportion has constantly decreased since then, but the pandemic
continued to disproportionately affect Canadians receiving long-term care in community settings,
specifically long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’ residences.
According to data from the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), nearly 19 out of 20
individuals living in long-term care facilities are seniors, with an average age of 81.
Based on data reported by CIHI on national health expenditure trends, PTs spend approximately
$28.5 billion annually on long-term care.
Based on Census data, more than 200,000 Canadians live in long-term care facilities
According to the Conference Board of Canada, by 2035, Canada will need an additional 199,000
beds to meet future demand (approximately doubling the current stock).
According to CIHI data, 2/3 of long-term care residents have moderate to severe cognitive
impairment, with 62% being diagnosed with dementia. 71% of residents have some form of
cognitive ailment.
In addition, 84% of long-term care residents have significant care needs (e.g., assistance with
personal hygiene, locomotion, eating)
About half of long-term residents are admitted directly from a hospital setting. Nearly 3/4 of
residents die during their long-term care residence.
An Angus Reid survey from March 2021 found three-quarters of Canadians said either significant
changes (45%) or a total overhaul (31%) is necessary if LTC is to be improved.
The same survey found that at least three-in-five residents in British Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario,
and Atlantic Canada agreed that the Government of Canada should be directly involved in creating
standards for the industry; however, in Alberta, Saskatchewan and Quebec, the same number
argued that it should be solely up to the provinces.
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous
Services Canada).
FEDERAL ACTIONS / FUNDING
LTC standards:
On December 1, 2022, CSA Group posted their new National Standard for LTC home operations
and infection prevention and control. This standard addresses the design, operation and infection
prevention and control practises in long-term care homes.
On January 31, 2023, HSO released their new National LTC Services Standard, which addresses the
delivery of safe, reliable, and high-quality LTC services. It focuses on resident-and-family-centred
care practises; safe, reliable and high-quality care; a healthy and competent workforce; and an
organizational culture that is outcome-focused and strives towards the safety and well-being of all
Canadians.
The federal government welcomed the release of these complementary, independent LTC
standards. While these standards are independent, the Government of Canada provided close to
$850,000 in funding to HSO and CSA Group to support enhanced engagement and consultations.
Safe Long-Term Care Act:
During summer and fall 2023, the federal government engaged Canadians on the development of a
Safe LTC Act to help ensure seniors get the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and
territorial jurisdiction.
The Safe LTC Act is also being informed by significant engagement and consultations with
Canadians and stakeholders already carried out by HSO and the CSA Group.
Federal funding:
Budget 2023 confirmed the federal government’s Working Together To Improve Health Care for
Canadians plan to provide close to $200 billion over ten years in health transfers to provinces and
territories, including $46.2 billion in new funding for provinces and territories to support the health
system through bilateral agreements, including $25 billion over 10 years to support the 4 shared
health priorities: expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and
reducing backlogs, increasing mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health
systems.
$2.4 billion for mental health and substance use services remaining from the 2017 federal budget
commitment to advance the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
In addition to the Working Together agreements, the Government of Canada is collaborating with
provinces and territories to implement a second set of bilateral agreements focused on the shared
priority of helping Canadians age with dignity close to home.
These Aging with Dignity agreements include:
$2.4 billion over four years to improve access to home and community care from Budget 2017; and
$3 billion over five years from Budget 2021 to apply standards of care in long-term care facilities
and help support workforce stability.
Some of the Aging with Dignity agreements are finalized. Examples of initiatives under these
agreements include:
British Columbia:
Improve the quality of dementia care, palliative, and end-of-life care in Long Term Care through
implementation of evidence-based practice knowledge, standardized education, and monitoring
tools.
Strengthen the appropriateness, safety, and quality of LTC by enabling consistent, appropriate
standards of care and oversight of LTC services.
Continue to stabilize and support the LTC workforce.
Manitoba:
Increased staffing and operational supports to long-term care facilities.
Implementation of an infection prevention and control (IPAC) provincial program to improve
integration, coordination and safety in IPAC practices.
support significant staffing expansions in facilities in line with increasing quality of care for
residents and improving safety.
Northwest Territories:
Workforce stability- helping meet NWT’s LTC staffing standard of 3.6 hours of direct care per
resident per day.
Territorial housekeeping specialist to address deficiencies and furniture and equipment
replacement.
Nunavut:
Development of a Made-in-Nunavut Personal Support Worker Program.
Support the continuing education of Continuing Care workers.
Provide virtual Nurse Practitioner resources to support the long-term care facilities in various areas.
Strengthen best practice supports for long-term care residents
Build capacity of Nunavut’s Home and Continuing Care Division
The federal government also:
Committed $1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage increases for personal support
workers and related professions.
Invested $1 billion, through the Safe LTC Fund, to support provinces and territories to protect those
living and working in LTC settings.
Committed $41.3 million over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing, starting in 2021-22, for Statistics
Canada to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary care, and
pharmaceuticals.
Committed $90 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment and Social
Development Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative.
Is increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022.
Announced an investment of $48,160,000 to implement a program that would support pilot
projects providing retirement savings incentives to Personal Support Workers without workplace
retirement security coverage. Authorities are currently being sought for access to these funds.
ISSUE SHEET – WILDFIRES
THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HEALTH PORTFOLIO ON WILDFIRES
The Health Portfolio is responsible for developing public health guidance, conducting surveillance,
providing public health surge capacity, and, through the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile,
responding to requests for assistance for surge assets such as cots, blankets, and masks.
Through its Air Quality Program, the Health Portfolio provides air quality monitoring surge capacity
and leads the development of messaging related to the impacts of wildfire smoke on air quality and
health, including the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI).
ACTIONS TAKEN ON WILDFIRES
Last year, the Health Portfolio worked effectively with federal partners to support
provincial/territorial (PT) and local responses during the wildfire season.
The Portfolio is preparing early for the upcoming wildfire season, holding portfolio-wide planning
meetings to prepare for the wildfire season, updating public health guidance documents, and
providing support to PTs and Indigenous Services Canada on wildfire smoke health effects and
ways to reduce exposure.
Health Canada is equipped to respond to emergency requests for air quality monitoring assistance
and can provide guidance to PTs on the use of small sensors, data interpretation and health
messaging during wildfire smoke events.
BACKGROUND
The World Health Organization (WHO) has called climate change the biggest global public health
threat of the 21st century. People in Canada are already feeling the effects of climate change on
their health, including from severe events like heatwaves, wildfires, floods and droughts and the
expansion of infectious diseases including vector-borne diseases, like Lyme disease, into Canada.
In June 2023, the Government of Canada released the final National Adaptation Strategy (NAS) and
supporting Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan (GOCAAP). The Strategy lays out an
agreed-upon framework to reduce the risk of climate-related disasters, improve health outcomes,
protect nature and biodiversity, build and maintain resilient infrastructure, and support a strong
economy and workers.
ISSUE SHEET – ASSISTED HUMAN REPRODUCTION
UPDATED DONOR SCREENING CRITERIA FOR SPERM AND OVA DONORS
On May 8, 2024, Health Canada updated its screening criteria for sperm and ova donors, integrating
the latest scientific evidence and input from consultations with subject-matter experts in donor
screening, industry, patient associations, and 2SLGBTQIA+ groups.
The updated policy is more inclusive, replacing the previous screening questions relating to men
who have sex with men (MSM) with gender-neutral, sexual behaviour-based donor screening
questions.
The updates build on similar changes made for blood donors in 2022. The Government of Canada is
committed to ensuring that its sperm and ova donation policy is safe, inclusive and scientifically
based.
PRIVATE SPERM DONORS IN QUEBEC
Health Canada is aware of the situation in Quebec, where it has been reported that hundreds of
children have been born as a result of privately donated sperm from three related men.
Private sperm donations from an individual to a recipient for their own use are beyond the scope of
the Assisted Human Reproduction Act and the related Safety of Sperm and Ova Regulations.
This is largely a provincial matter, owing to the division of powers which limits the federal role in
overseeing assisted human reproduction in Canada. Health Canada is open to discussions with the
province, based on our respective roles and responsibilities in this space.
ISSUE SHEET – THALIDOMIDE
CURRENT CONTEXT
The Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (CTSSP) was established by Order in Council
(OIC) in April 2019. The OIC sets out a probability-based medical assessment process for
determining eligibility under the program, which is designed to align with international best
practices. An independent third-party administrator is responsible for determining eligibility of
applicants.
The CTSSP is currently helping to support 127 survivors. Although new survivors are being admitted
to the program each year, a few existing survivors have passed away.
The CTSSP application process was launched on June 3, 2019, for a period of five years. The
deadline for submitting an application for eligibility is June 3, 2024.
To date, 291 applications have been submitted to the administrator and are at various stages of the
probability based medical assessment process.
Applicants denied at any step of the process are given an opportunity to provide additional
information to support their submission.
The CTSSP offers:
an immediate ex gratia payment of $250,000,
ongoing yearly support payments of $25K-$100K, indexed at 2% beginning at current year levels;
and
access to an Extraordinary Medical Assistance Fund to help with extraordinary health support
needs such as specialized surgeries, home or vehicle adaptations and some ongoing costs related
to chiropractic care, physiotherapy and attendant services, among others. The Fund is set at
$1M/year, indexed at 2%.
LEGAL LANDSCAPE AND IMPACTS ON THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS
On April 29, 2024, the Federal Court rendered a decision in the matter known as Richard v. Attorney
General of Canada, striking the date of birth criteria as an admissibility requirement for the CTSSP.
all applicants previously denied based on the date of birth criteria were advised of the Court’s
decision and the opportunity to submit for reconsideration.
Applicants who meet all three criteria at Step 1, will receive information and materials for
proceeding to an application for Step 2.
The Crown’s decision whether to appeal is pending (must be filed within 30 days of judgement).
On August 2022, a Federal Court judgement was rendered allowing all previously denied step 2
applications to move to step 3, generating an influx of files for review by the multidisciplinary
committee.
The committee is made up of medical geneticists, experts in thalidomide embryopathy and legal
experts.
The committee members must carefully review the totality of the information submitted before
making a recommendation on the probability that thalidomide caused injury. Given the complexity
of thalidomide embryopathy and the sheer volume of information in each file, this review is time
consuming.
The availability of experts world wide is very limited, making it difficult to scale up capacity at this
stage of the assessment process.
OTHER LEGAL CHALLENGES
In February 2021, a group of six confirmed thalidomide survivors, who refer to themselves as the
Thalidomide Survivors Task Group, filed a Charter Claim against the Crown (Ontario Superior
Court). The claim alleges that the Crown breached the individuals’ rights with respect to the
provision of services to individual plaintiffs, mismanagement of the impact of thalidomide on the
plaintiffs, and the overall funding and management of the CTSSP.
OTHER CHALLENGES
There is no definitive medical test for thalidomide (genetic or other), making it a complex issue.
To this day, a number of children are born with spontaneous or otherwise unaccountable
malformations similar to those caused by thalidomide.
According to the World Health Organization, congenital malformations may be the result of one or
more genetic, infectious, nutritional, or environmental factors. Approximately half of all birth
defects cannot be linked to a specific cause.
HISTORY
Thalidomide, developed as a non-addictive sedative, was approved by the Department of National
Health and Welfare (now Health Canada) and prescribed off-label to treat morning sickness in
expectant mothers.
Government records show that thalidomide was authorized for use in Canada in sample form on
June 23, 1959. It was licensed for prescription use on April 1, 1961, and remained legally available
in Canada until March 2, 1962, when it was removed from the market due to its side effects.
In 1991, the Government of Canada finalized an Extraordinary Assistance Plan (EAP) of $8.5M for
persons born with disabilities as a result of thalidomide.
In 2015, the Thalidomide Survivors Contribution Program (TSCP) was introduced, utilizing the same
evidence-based eligibility criteria as were applied in 1991. Like the CTSSP, supports included a tax-
free, lump sum payment, ongoing annual payments based on level of disability, and access to an
Extraordinary Medical Assistance Fund (EMAF) to cover medical expenses such as specialized
surgery and home or vehicle adaptations not otherwise covered by provincial/territorial health care
plans.
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians
Canada Health Transfer (CHT) and other Health Related Transfers
This table shows the funding amounts allocated to provinces and territories through the Canada
Health Transfer (CHT) in 2024-25, as well as, the PT allocations under other programs and transfers,
such as, Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), the Emergency Treatment Fund, Virtual
Care, and the 2017 Bilateral Agreements on Home and Community Care and Mental Health and
Addictions Services.
NL
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
688
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
2.4
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
1.5
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
4.5
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
151
NS
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
228
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
2.5
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
3.2
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
5.9
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
285
NB
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
1,379
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
5.3
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
2.8
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
5.3
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
227
PEI
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
1,085
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
0.9
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
0.52
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
3.5
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
47
QC
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
111,455
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
53.2
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
22
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
28.1
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
2,479
ON
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
20,2829
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
135.4
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
51
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
46
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
4,262
MB
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
1,889
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
8.2
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
4.1
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
7
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
399
SK
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
1,565
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
6.4
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
5
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
6.5
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
341
AB
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
6,164
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
11.9
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
24
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
15.9
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
1,279
BC
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
7,172
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
62.6
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
34
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
18
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
1,494
YK
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
58
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
0.7
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
0.5
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
3.1
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
12.3
NWT
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
57
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
2.4
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
.5
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
3.1
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
13.1
NU
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
52
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
-
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
0.5
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
3.1
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
11.3
Total
Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2024-25)
52,081
Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for a seven year period)
291.9
Emergency Treatment Fund*(in millions) (estimate is for a five year period)
150
Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions) (2020-21)
150
Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services (in
millions) (estimate is for a ten year period)
11,000
Note: Budget 2024 proposes to provide and additional $150 million over three years, starting in
2024-25, to Health Canada for an Emergency Treatment Fund, open to municipalities and
Indigenous communities to help provide rapid responses to emergent, critical needs related to the
opioid crisis. These funds have yet to be allocated.
Totals may not add due to rounding
LONG-TERM CARE
This table shows the funding amounts that were allocated to provinces and territories in 2021-22 for
the $1 billion Safe Long-Term Care fund that was first announced in the 2020 Fall Economic
Statement. It also shows the proposed allocation to provinces and territories under the $3 billion
long-term care funding that was announced in Budget 2021 and has subsequently become part of
the Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians Health Funding Plan, first announced in
February 2023, and confirmed in Budget 2024 (see Working Together Table above).
Jurisdiction
NL
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$15M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$43M
Jurisdiction
PEI
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$6M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$19M
Jurisdiction
NS
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$27M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$81M
Jurisdiction
NB
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$22M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$65M
Jurisdiction
QC
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$221M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$646M
Jurisdiction
ON
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$380M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$1,149M
Jurisdiction
MB
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$37M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$110M
Jurisdiction
SK
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$32M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$95M
Jurisdiction
AB
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$115M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$350M
Jurisdiction
BC
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$135M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$413M
Jurisdiction
YT
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$3M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$9M
Jurisdiction
NWT
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$3M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$9M
Jurisdiction
NU
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$3.0M
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$9M
Jurisdiction
Total
Safe Long-Term Care (2020 Fall Economic Statement)
$1 B
Long-Term Care (Budget 2021) 5 year funding commitment
$3B
Working Together Agreements - Summary
Overview
The funding for the current bilateral agreements includes the 3 years (4 years for Quebec) of the
federal funding commitment of:
$25 billion over 10 years to support the 4 shared health priorities ($2.5B/year)
$2.4 billion for mental health and substance use services for the remaining four years of the 2017
federal budget commitment to advance the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities ($600M/year)
The bilateral agreements include action plans that are flexible and tailored by the provinces and
territories to address the unique needs of their populations and geography. Provinces and territories
are using federal funds to support one or more of the 4 shared health priorities outlined within the
Working Together to Improve Healthcare for Canadians plan:
expanding access to family health services, including in rural and remote areas.
supporting health workers and reducing backlogs for health services such as surgeries and
diagnostics.
improving access to quality mental health, substance use and addictions services.
modernizing the health care system with standardized information and digital tools so health care
providers and patients have access to electronic health information.
Estimate of Federal Funding to PTs – Working Together Agreements ($ millions)*
PT Signed 3-year Agreements Total 10-year funding commitment
B2023 Working Together B2017 MHSU Total B2023 Working Together B2017 MHSU Total
AB 856 210 1,066 2,852 280 3,132
BC 976 246 1,222 3,253 328 3,581
MB 369 65 434 1,229 87 1,316
NB 276 38 313 920 50 970
NL 232 24 256 772 32 805
NWT 22 2 24 74 3 76
NS 308 47 355 1,028 63 1,091
NU 21 2 23.6 71 3 74
ON 2,496 699 3,195 8,321 932 9,252
PEI 87 8 94 288 10 299
QC 1,984 531 2,515 5,000 531 5,531
SK 336 55 391 1,118 74 1,192
YK 22 2 23.8 73 3 75
Amounts may not equal totals due to rounding, and are subject to annual adjustments based on
Statistics Canada's population estimates.
Current QC agreement is 4 years.
Examples of Initiatives within Provincial and Territorial Action Plans
PT Expanding access to family health services, including in rural and remote areas
AB Increase access to primary care by expanding team-based care and enhancing virtual care.
BC N/A – no spending in action plan
MB N/A – no spending in action plan
NB Increase the quality and availability of primary care providers across the province, including
by allowing nurse practitioners to provide non-urgent care as an alternative
to emergency department visits.
NL Increase access to primary care by continuing to add new family care teams, creating
urgent care centres to service the Northeast Avalon, and adding new positions to substantially
improve how children receive care.
NWT Increase coordination and access to primary care across the regions by establishing a
territorial public health unit.
NS Increase access to health care providers by expanding clinic hours in rural and remote
communities, and introducing mobile health services and virtual urgent care.
NU Increase coordination and access to primary care across the regions, including expanding
existing paramedic care to all 25 Nunavut communities.
Increase the number of Inuit in health care positions through an Inuit-specific radiological
technician program with 150 graduates over three years.
ON Expand enrollment in health care education programs by over 700 seats.
PEI Building 16 new Patient Medical Homes and establishing a network of team-based health
providers and services across the province through Patient Medical Neighbourhoods.
QC Improve access to family health teams by opening new front-line clinics, make it easier
to book appointments through the “Votre Santé” portal, and improve care for patients with rare or
chronic diseases.
SK Improve access to family health services and acute and urgent care including by creating
new permanent acute care and complex care beds in Regina and Saskatoon hospitals.
YK Improve access to family health services, including establishing a new walk-in primary
care clinic expected to help at least 1,500 patients annually.
PT Supporting our health workers and reducing backlogs
AB Funding community providers to increase diagnostic imaging capacity in the
province, reducing wait times for CT scans and MRIs.
BC Develop an innovative model of care so nurses can spend more time with patients.
MB Hire 400 more doctors, 300 more nurses, 200 paramedics, and 100 home care
workers to address staffing shortages.
Support new acute care beds to increase system capacity and the number of acute
care beds.
NB Support recruitment, retention, and training for health care workers to reduce
backlogs, such as by incentivizing doctors to move to rural and underserved areas, including
Francophone communities, and making it easier for health professionals with international
credentials to practice.
NL Institute models of care that address surgical backlogs and increase access to
health services, including by expanding orthopaedic surgeries in Carbonear.
NWT Support recruitment, retention, and training initiatives for health workers.
NS Increase the number of family physicians, nurse practitioners, and registered nurses
to address workforce needs.
NU Help reduce backlogs, for example, by acquiring key medical equipment to reduce
reliance on patient travel to Ottawa.
Address orthopedic needs by purchasing a CT scanner, acquiring a portable MRI,
and purchasing a C-Arm to increase in-territory medical procedures and reduce the reliance on
patient travel.
ON Removing barriers to foreign credential recognition, simplifying licensing processes,
and increasing program access for highly educated and skilled health professionals.
PEI Advance interprovincial and foreign credential recognition in the health workforce,
by developing a strategic plan to recruit internationally educated health professionals, and by
leveraging technology for streamlined training.
Increase access to diagnostic services by expanding laboratory services, extending
hours of operation, and reducing wait times for patients.
QC Reduce surgical and diagnostic backlogs, by supporting the new approach
developed for vaccination and screening and extending it to other front-line services.
SK Help reduce backlogs through the recruitment of new health care workers, and by
supporting the expansion of 550 post-secondary training seats.
YK N/A – no spending in action plan
PT Improving access to quality mental health, substance use, and addictions services
(including B2023 Working Together and B2017 MHSU funding)
AB Reduce wait times for community mental health and substance use services by
establishing new treatment spaces and improving existing ones.
BC Enhance access to mental health and addictions services by building on existing
efforts in areas of integrated youth services, treatment and recovery, and innovative approaches to
respond to the ongoing overdose crisis.
MB Hire more psychologists to help reduce wait times for counselling.
Support addictions treatment services, peer support, and other community-based
mental health.
NB Expand mental health and substance use supports, including for Indigenous
communities, particularly youth, and increasing the number of beds in mental health care facilities.
NL Increase the number of people with access to mental health teams.
Improve access to services for rural and Indigenous communities and offer
community- based services, substance use support, and innovative online mental health services.
NWT Enhance culturally appropriate mental wellness and suicide prevention
programming, including crisis response.
NS Enhancing access to youth mental health and substance use services by adding
three active Integrated Youth Services sites by 2025-26.
NU Expand the delivery of culturally appropriate mental health and addiction services
and specialized care.
Support training for paraprofessionals to ensure Inuit in Nunavut can access Inuit-
specific, culturally, and linguistically relevant mental health services and programs.
ON Reduce barriers to accessing early intervention and prevention mental health and
addictions supports for children and youth.
PEI Invest in Mobile Mental Health units and Student Well-being Teams to reach an
additional 2,500 patients by 2026.
QC Strengthen mental health care, and homelessness and addictions services,
including by creating new services and spaces for youth and children with disabilities.
SK Expand mental health and substance use services for youth.
YK Expand the delivery of mental health and additions services, for example, by
creating Yukon’s first residential managed alcohol withdrawal program with a capacity of ten beds
by 2025-26.
PT Modernizing health systems with health data and digital tools
AB Enhance access to digital health services and health information by implementing
e- referral services and accelerating the secure exchange of data across the health system.
BC Increase the percentage of people in the province who have access to their own
electronic health information, and increase the percentage of family health service providers that
can securely share patient health information.
MB N/A – no spending in action plan
NB Improve timely access to both virtual and in-person primary care through eVisitNB
and NB Health Link for those who do not have a primary care provider.
NL Increase the number of Newfoundlanders and Labradorians who can access their
own health record electronically.
NWT N/A – no spending in action plan
NS Developing digital tools to make it easier for people in the province to access their
health information, book appointments, and access virtual health services.
NU N/A – no spending in action plan
ON Modernize digital infrastructure, including information reporting, collection, and
sharing.
Make health care more convenient, connected, and patient-centred by expanding
the availability of electronic health information and increasing the number of health professionals
who can securely access and share it.
PEI N/A – no spending in action plan
QC Accelerate digitalization across the health care network to make it easier for
patients to access their information and faster for doctors to update charts.
SK Modernize health care systems with health data and digital tools by continuing
investments in eHealth and health sector information technology.
YK N/A – no spending in action plan
Questions & Answers
Pharmacare Bill Legislation
Q1. How much is this going to cost?
The bill sets out that discussions would need to first occur between provinces and territories (PTs)
with respect to the funding of universal, single-payer coverage for a range of contraception and
diabetes medications. Further information on the cost will be subject to forthcoming discussions
and subsequent agreements with willing PTs.
Separate from this Bill, the Government of Canada would also create a fund for diabetes devices
and supplies. This fund would be rolled out to support access to diabetes devices such as
continuous glucose monitors, insulin pumps, syringes and test strips.
Also as set out in the Bill, the Minister will establish a committee of experts to make
recommendations respecting options for the operation and financing of national, universal, single-
payer pharmacare, which would include information on costs starting with contraception and
diabetes medications.
If pressed on the cost of universal pharmacare,
The Bill outlines a mechanism, through collaboration and agreements with willing PTs, that will put
in place a universal single-payer model for the coverage of specific contraception and diabetes
medications. The intent of this funding would be to enhance, rather than replace, existing PT
spending on public drug benefit programs.
There are a range of costing estimates depending on model of coverage and formulary so it would
be impossible to give a definitive answer to this question. This Bill provides for a committee of
experts to make recommendations related to the financing and operation of single-payer
pharmacare.
If pressed on the $1.5 billion cost stated in news articles and Budget 2024
The announcement of $1.5B over five years in Budget 2024 confirms the federal government’s
commitment to provide funding to launch national pharmacare in Canada.
As outlined in Bill C-64, there is a commitment to maintaining long-term funding for the provinces,
territories, and Indigenous peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products.
The Bill also states the Government’s intention to work with provinces and territories to increase
existing public pharmacare coverage to provide universal, single-payer coverage for specific
contraception and diabetes medications.
The Minister has had some preliminary discussions with his provincial and territorial counterparts.
The federal government will discuss with provinces and territories how we can work together to
achieve these commitments, while recognizing the unique drug coverage context within each
jurisdiction. As these discussions unfold, more information will become available.
Q2. Why were contraception and diabetes drugs chosen specifically?
These targeted measures will improve equity, affordability, and health outcomes and have the
potential of long-term savings to the health care system.
Access to contraception reduces the risk of unintended pregnancies and improves people’s ability
to determine their own contribution to society and the economy. In Canada, there are more than 9
million people of reproductive age who make up nearly one quarter of the Canadian population
(22.5% in 2022). Cost has consistently been identified as the single most important barrier to
access to these medications and the cost is unevenly borne by women and gender diverse
Canadians.
Diabetes is a very complex disease affecting more than 3.7 million Canadians and can be treated
with safe and effective medications. Additionally, uncontrolled diabetes and its complications can
lead to high and unnecessary costs incurred from lost productivity and elevated health-care system
use. Access to diabetes medications can improve the health of Canadians living with diabetes and
reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications such as blindness or amputations.
More information is available in the backgrounders.
Q3. When will other drugs be added and what is the process to do that?
This Bill outlines a framework that would help guide collaboration with provinces, territories,
Indigenous Peoples, stakeholders and partners to develop national universal pharmacare over
time, based on the foundational principles outlined in the Bill.
The Bill also sets out processes and next steps for other foundational elements of a national
pharmacare program, including work on a national formulary, a national bulk purchasing plan, an
appropriate use strategy and an expert committee. The consideration of adding other drugs would
evolve against the backdrop of these other elements, in addition to ongoing collaboration with
provinces, territories, stakeholder and partners.
In addition to work that will be carried out through the Bill, the Government of Canada is already
moving forward, in collaboration with PTs, on other pharmacare initiatives that are delivering
results. This includes work on the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, the Improving
Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs Initiative with Prince Edward Island, and work to establish
the Canadian Drug Agency.
Q4. Is this coverage of contraception and diabetes medications truly “single payer” model?
Canada currently relies on more than 100 government-run drug insurance programs designed to
serve people in vulnerable groups, and more than 100,000 private drug insurance plans that largely
provide employment-based coverage. A “single-payer” system means that a government pays for
services on behalf of all its citizens. In the Canadian context, where PTs deliver health care, the
term “single-payer” means PT governments, which is often supported by federal funding.
The Bill outlines a mechanism, through collaboration and agreements with willing PTs, that will put
in place a universal single-payer model for the coverage of specific contraception and diabetes
medications. The intent of this funding would be to enhance, rather than replace, existing PT
spending on public drug benefit programs.
Q5. What could be the impact on private drug insurance? Should people opt-out of their private
insurance plan if their province accepts funding for contraception and diabetes?
The Bill does not reference private drug insurance or legislate any of its activities. Workplace health
benefit plans often cover a range of costs beyond drug coverage, including services from other
health providers (such as physiotherapy) and include benefits like life insurance and disability
benefits. Employers use these plans for recruitment and retention of employees, as part of an
employee’s compensation. Until agreements are in place with PTs, employers and employees
would be unlikely to want to make any changes to their drug plans.
Canadians that do have private drug insurance would also have coverage for a broader scope of
drug classes beyond the specific contraception and diabetes medications outlined in the Bill.
Furthermore, access to the specific contraception and diabetes medications will be dependent on
the establishment of bilateral agreements with PTs before implementation of this initiative
commences.
Q6. Would there need to be changes to the CHA to roll-out full pharmacare?
There are no plans to make amendments to the Canada Health Act (CHA) and this Bill does not
require the CHA be amended.
In recognition of PT jurisdiction on the delivery of health care services and the essential role they
play in implementing pharmacare, it is important that the Canadian government take a
collaborative approach with partners as we move forward.
This Bill provides a flexible approach to allow for discussions to occur with PTs and subsequently
working with them to implement national universal pharmacare over time.
Furthermore, the Bill contains other pharmacare commitments such as a national formulary and a
national bulk purchasing plan which would be outside the scope of the CHA.
Q7. Why doesn’t this Bill follow the recommendations outlined in the Advisory Council/ Hoskins
report?
This preamble text of the Bill recognizes the work and recommendations of the Advisory Council
and the Bill follows several recommendations of the report, including:
Taking a step by step approach to the implementation of pharmacare in partnership with PTs and
Indigenous populations;
Having essential medicines as a starting point in the development of a national formulary;
Establishing a Canadian Drug Agency (CDA) that would help develop a national formulary, a
purchasing strategy, and provide guidance on appropriate use; and,
Recognizing the need to improve access to drugs for rare diseases.
Q8. Why is there currently funding to PEI for its program and no other province or territory?
The PEI demonstration initiative is giving real world lessons in how pharmacare principles can be
implemented in Canada's distinct pharmaceutical landscape.
PEI signaled its interest in participating in a demonstration initiative and an agreement was
announced on August 11, 2021. Through this agreement, PEI received $35 million in federal funding
to add new drugs to its list of covered drugs and lower out of pocket costs for drugs covered under
existing public plans for Island residents.
To date, the PEI project has increased access to over 100 drugs, reduced copays and other cost
barriers for residents, and reduced paperwork to access certain medications. Within the first 6
months alone, PEI residents have saved over $2 million on over 230,000 prescriptions. These
actions under the PEI demonstration initiative have helped demonstrate practically how
affordability and accessibility principles can be achieved in the real world.
The Government of Canada will use these lessons to inform future discussions with PTs.
Q9. Have discussions taken place with other provinces and territories? Are they supportive?
This Bill sets the framework for future collaboration in implementing national universal pharmacare
with willing jurisdictions and also key partners including Indigenous Peoples, patients, and
stakeholders.
The Government of Canada would work with willing PTs to implement coverage for specific
contraception and diabetes medications through bilateral agreements.
The Government of Canada is already engaging PTs on other pharmacare initiatives that are
delivering results, including the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, the Improving
Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs initiative and working to establish the CDA.
Q10. What will the national formulary look like and how will it be covered under national universal
pharmacare?
A national formulary is a list of approved prescription drugs and products which all Canadians
should have access to under national universal pharmacare.
To inform the development of a national formulary, this Bill sets out that the Minister would request
the CDA prepare a list of essential prescription drugs and related products. This list would be a
starting point for partners to consider which pharmaceutical products should be included under
national universal pharmacare. It would also help set out parameters for future bilateral
agreements with PTs.
Upon completion of this list, the Minister must initiate discussions with PTs, Indigenous peoples
and other partners and stakeholders with the aim of continuing to work toward the first phase of
national universal pharmacare.
The CDA is an expert in this area and is best placed to develop this starting point in collaboration
with PTs, Indigenous Peoples, and other partners and stakeholders. The CDA would be expected to
develop this list no later than the first anniversary of the day on which this Bill gets approved.
Q11. How long will it take to get to full pharmacare if this is a foundational step?
The 2019 Advisory Panel proposed a step-by-step approach and implementation over seven years
as it recognized the complexity of the current situation with regard to prescription drug affordability
and access in Canada, taking into consideration the various ways Canadians may receive drug
coverage.
This Bill would guide collaboration with PTs, Indigenous Peoples, stakeholders, and partners to
develop national universal pharmacare over time, based on the foundational principles outlined in
the Bill.
This will also be dependent on the forthcoming discussions with PTs regarding specific
contraception and diabetes medications and subsequent agreements that will be put in place with
willing PTs.
Q12. What is the bulk purchasing strategy?
This Bill tasks the Minister to request the CDA to develop advice on a national bulk purchasing
strategy no later than the first anniversary of the day on which the Act receives royal assent.
In simple terms, a bulk purchasing strategy means a coordinated price negotiation approach to
maximize negotiating power and lead to lower drug prices for Canadians. Because the purchase is
made in bulk form, a better deal can be negotiated.
The bulk purchasing strategy will not include the physical purchase and stockpile of drugs by the
Government of Canada on behalf of responsible governments.
Q13. Does this Bill create the mandate for the Canadian Drug Agency?
No. The Bill does not create anything regarding the Agency’s organizational mandate, governance,
or funding. The creation of the CDA was announced on December 18, 2023.
The Bill describes the Minister’s power to request advice from the CDA. It states that the Minister of
Health must request that the CDA prepare a list of essential prescription drugs and related
products to inform the development of a national formulary and develop a national bulk purchasing
strategy.
If pressed on the role and functions of the CDA:
The CDA will be built from the existing Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health
(CADTH) and in partnership with PTs. The CDA will incorporate and expand on CADTH’s expertise in
the pharmaceutical sector, including its strong leadership and technical proficiency.
The CDA will work to improve the appropriate prescribing and use of medications; increase access
to drug and treatment data; and reduce drug system duplication and lack of coordination.
Q14. What will be the impact of the pharmacare bill on Indigenous Peoples in Canada?
The Bill commits to engaging and collaborating with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis governments and
representative organizations on the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
The Bill has no impact on any current federal programs for Indigenous Peoples, such as drug
coverage for registered First Nations and recognized Inuit through the Non-Insured Health Benefits
(NIHB) Program.
Q15. What if a province opts out with the expectation of full compensation?
As outlined in the Bill, in order to receive federal funding to provide universal, single-payer coverage
for contraception and diabetes medications, a bilateral agreement would need to be made
between the Government of Canada and a willing province or territory.
The Bill also recognizes the jurisdiction of PTs in the provision of health care, including the coverage
of prescription drugs and related products.
Q16. In BC, contraceptives are already free. What will this new federal program mean for them?
As outlined in the Bill, in order to receive federal funding to provide universal, single-payer coverage
for contraception and diabetes medications, a bilateral agreement would need to be made
between the Government of Canada and a province or territory.
We will take the necessary time to work with provinces and territories, like BC, to discuss the
details of bilateral agreements recognizing the unique public drug coverage contexts across all of
the PTs.
Q17. How will this Bill apply in Quebec for contraceptive and diabetes coverage?
Quebec has a mixed payer model which ensures that their residents always have some form of
public or private drug coverage.
This Bill outlines the framework for discussions to come with willing jurisdictions as partners in
implementing national universal pharmacare, including Quebec. It also sets out foundational
principles for affordability, accessibility, appropriate use and universality that can be applied to any
drug coverage model in Canada.
Q18. If this Bill is only framework legislation, what is the Government doing now to make drugs
more accessible and affordable for Canadians?
The Government continues its work to streamline the approval of new drugs while ensuring their
safety, efficacy, and quality; advance on national pharmacare; implement a national strategy for
drugs for rare diseases; and proceed with an ambitious biomanufacturing and life sciences
strategy.
These developments will improve the accessibility of new medicines for people in Canada and
support the sustainability of the health care system, while at the same time supporting innovation
and investment in the pharmaceutical sector.
On March 22, 2023, the Minister of Health announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three
years to increase access to, and affordability of, effective drugs for rare diseases to help improve
the health and lives of patients living with a rare disease in Canada. This investment in improving
the accessibility and affordability of drugs for rare diseases is an important piece of pharmacare.
The Government of Canada has also been working in collaboration with PTs to help Canadians
access more common prescription medications. In August 2021, the Government announced the
Improving Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs agreement to provide Prince Edward Island
(PEI) with $35 million over four years starting in 2021-22 to support the province’s efforts to provide
its residents with more affordable access to prescription drugs.
In June 2023, PEI’s $5 copay program reduced copays for almost 60% of medications regularly used
by Island residents for eligible medications used for cardiovascular disease, diabetes and mental
health covered under the public drug programs. The High-Cost Drug Program was also modified to
remove barriers making the program available to all income levels. In addition, in July 2023, PEI
adjusted the Catastrophic Drug Program to lower the annual cap on the amount of money a
household spends on eligible medications.
As of November 2023, PEI residents have saved over $2 million out-of-pocket costs on more than
230,000 prescriptions.
The Government of Canada also supports the work of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance
(pCPA) which negotiates drug prices for public drug plans. These negotiations have produced
savings of $3.4 billion annually.
Q19. What are the options for models that the government is considering (or that you have studied)
for pharmacare?
The Bill does not identify a model of pharmacare
The Bill commits that the Government of Canada would continue to collaborate with partners and
stakeholders in implementing national universal pharmacare.
Specific models, including the operation and financing of universal, single payer pharmacare, will
be studied by the expert committee described in the Bill.
News Release
For Immediate Release
Government of Canada Introduces Legislation for First Phase of National Universal Pharmacare
Legislation includes universal access to contraception and diabetes medications.
February 29, 2024 | Ottawa, Ontario | Health Canada
Today, the Honourable Mark Holland, Minister of Health, introduced Bill C-64, An Act respecting
pharmacare (Pharmacare Act), which proposes the foundational principles for first phase of
national universal pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to
work with provinces and territories (PTs) to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of
contraception and diabetes medications.
The Minister also announced the government’s plan to establish a fund to support Canadians’
access to supplies that diabetics require to manage and monitor their condition and administer
their medication, such as syringes and glucose test strips.
This legislation is an important step forward to improve health equity, affordability, and outcomes
and has the potential of long-term savings to the health care system.
Coverage for contraceptives will mean that 9 million Canadians of reproductive age will have better
access to contraception and reproductive autonomy, reducing the risk of unintended pregnancies
and improving their ability to plan for the future. Cost has consistently been identified as the single
most important barrier to access to these medications and the cost is unevenly borne by women
and gender diverse Canadians. Bill C-64 will ensure that Canadians will have access to a
comprehensive suite of contraceptive drugs and devices.
Diabetes is a complex disease that has no cure but can be treated with safe and effective
medications. One in four Canadians with diabetes have reported not following their treatment plan
due to cost.
Improving access to diabetes medications will help improve the health of 3.7 million Canadians
living with diabetes and reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications such as
blindness or amputations.
Over the past year, the Government of Canada has delivered on key actions to provide better and
more accessible health care in Canada. Financial barriers should not be an impediment to
accessing safe and effective prescription drugs and related products. We are determined to work
towards a plan where Canadians can obtain their medication as prescribed, regardless of where
they live or their ability to pay.
The Bill demonstrates the Government of Canada’s commitment to consulting widely about the
way forward and working with provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and
stakeholders to improve the accessibility, affordability and appropriate use of pharmaceutical
products, by reducing financial barriers and contributing to physical and mental health and well-
being.
Bill C-64 also provides that the new Canadian Drug Agency work towards the development of a
national formulary, develop a national bulk purchasing strategy, and support the publication of a
pan- Canadian strategy regarding the appropriate use of prescription medications.
Together, these elements would form the key next steps towards national universal pharmacare in
Canada. The Minister would further establish a committee of experts to make recommendations on
the operation and financing of national, universal, single-payer pharmacare in Canada.
Bill C-64 proposes a significant change to our heath care landscape, which, together with the
learnings from ongoing initiatives such as the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases and the
Improving Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs initiative with Prince Edward Island, are part of
the Government of Canada’s plan to ensure Canadians can access the medicines they need and
pave the way forward towards the implementation of national universal pharmacare in Canada.
Quotes
“Each and every Canadian should have access to the prescription drugs they need. That’s why
we’re working with our partners towards the first phase of national universal pharmacare. This
important next step will provide universal access to contraception and diabetes medication that
will be transformational in improving health outcomes in Canada.”
The Honourable Mark Holland Minister of Health
Quick Facts
On December 18, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the creation of the Canadian Drug
Agency with an investment of over $89.5 million over 5 years, starting in 2024-25. The Agency will
provide the dedicated leadership and coordination needed to make Canada’s drug system more
sustainable and prepared for the future and help Canadians achieve better health outcomes.
On March 22 2023, the Government of Canada announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three
years to help increase access to, and the affordability of, effective drugs for rare diseases. Bill C-64
commits to a model for long-term funding, beginning with funding for the National Strategy for
Drugs for Rare Diseases and to be primarily provided through bilateral agreements with provinces
and territories.
PEI residents have saved over $2 million in out-of-pocket costs on more than 230,000 prescriptions
under PEI’s $5 copay program, which was launched in June 2023 and reduced copays for almost
60% of medications regularly used by Island residents. These latest improvements are an important
milestone of the Improving Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs (IAAPD) initiative that provides
federal funding to PEI to improve access to prescription drugs and make prescriptions drugs more
affordable for Island residents.
Associated Links
Backgrounder: Universal Access to Contraception
Backgrounder: Universal Access to Diabetes Medications, and Diabetes Device Fund for Devices
and Supplies
Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
Prescription drug insurance coverage
Canada’s Plan for Universal Pharmacare
Steps towards national universal pharmacare
2019:
Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
Budget 2019 Commitment for foundational elements: Canadian Drug Agency (CDA), National
Formulary and National Strategy for Rare Diseases
2020:
Speech from the Throne commitment to PT engagement towards national, universal pharmacare,
proceeding with National Strategy for Rare Diseases, advancing work to establish the CDA
2021:
Investment of $35M with Prince Edward Island for the Improving Affordable Access to Prescription
Drugs Initiative
2022:
June 2022, a multidisciplinary national panel convened by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and
Technology in Health (CADTH), at the request of Health Canada, recommended a framework for
developing a national formulary and a sample list of drugs.
Budget 2022 commitments to introduce Pharmacare Bill and task CDA to develop a national
formulary
2023:
March 2023, the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases (DRD) was launched with an
investment of up to $1.5B over 3 years to increase access to, and affordability of, DRDs.
December 2023 creation of the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA) with an investment of $89.5 million
over 5 years, starting in 2024-25.
An Act respecting pharmacare
This Bill represents the first phase in the federal government’s commitment to establish national
universal pharmacare.
Sets the federal government’s framework to guide its efforts with partners to improve prescription
drug accessibility, affordability, universal coverage and appropriate use, for all Canadians.
Formalizes a requirement to work collaboratively with provinces and territories and Indigenous
peoples to build national universal pharmacare through a step-by-step approach.
Describes the Government’s intent to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a range of
contraception and diabetes medications through collaborative arrangements with willing provinces
and territories.
Supports the development of a national formulary of essential prescription drugs and related
products and the development of a national bulk purchasing strategy, to be led by the Canadian
Drug Agency.
Principles
The bill outlines that the Minister is to consider the following principles and the Canada Health Act,
when collaborating with provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and
stakeholders towards national universal pharmacare:
a. improve the accessibility of pharmaceutical products, including through their coverage, in a
manner that is more consistent across Canada;
b. improve the affordability of pharmaceutical products, including by reducing financial barriers for
Canadians;
c. support the appropriate use of pharmaceutical products — namely, in a manner that prioritizes
patient safety, optimizes health outcomes and reinforces health system sustainability — in order to
improve the physical and mental health and well-being of Canadians; and
d. provide universal coverage of pharmaceutical products across Canada.
The principles included in the bill are intended to guide efforts to improve coverage for Canadians
and align with ongoing work related to drugs for rare diseases and the Canadian Drug Agency.
Bilateral Agreements and Funding
This Bill legislates a path to bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories by providing a
federal commitment to long-term pharmacare funding beginning with existing funding for drugs for
rare diseases as announced in Budget 2019.
If the Minister enters in a bilateral agreement with a willing province or territory, the Minister may
provide funding to that province or territory, to increase any existing pharmacare coverage, allowing
the province or territory to provide universal, single-payer, first dollar coverage, for specific
prescription drugs and related products intended for contraception or the treatment of diabetes.
Specific Contraception and Diabetes Medications
The Government will work with willing provinces and territories to implement coverage for specific
contraception and diabetes medications through bilateral agreements, per the Bill. Funding will
enhance, rather than replace, existing provincial and territorial spending on public drug benefit
programs.
The specific contraception and diabetes medications are listed in the backgrounders.
Specific Contraception and Diabetes Medications (cont’d)
Starting with these drugs is part of the step-by-step approach set out in the Bill.
Provides an opportunity to test the application of the principles of improving access, affordability,
appropriate use and universal coverage at a national scale within the context of the complexity of
Canada’s healthcare system.
Provides for a nationally consistent approach that some provinces have already begun to
implement to support uptake of effective contraception methods.
Benefits people living with and managing diabetes and helps ensure that these individuals are able
to afford the drugs that they need.
The Minister will also work with PTs to establish a fund for diabetes devices and supplies to support
patients in managing their diabetes and administering their medication.
The Canadian Drug Agency (CDA)
On December 18, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the creation of the Canadian Drug
Agency (CDA). The CDA will be built from the existing Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH) and in partnership with provinces and territories (PTs).
The bill outlines the functions of the CDA, a key foundational element of national pharmacare, as
outlined below:
Clinical and cost-effectiveness analysis
Advice to inform formulary listing by federal, provincial and territorial drug plans
Pharmaceutical data and analytics
Appropriate prescribing and use
Pharmaceutical system coordination
National Formulary and Bulk Purchasing Strategy
After discussions with the provinces and territories, the Bill requires that the Minister request that
the CDA:
1. prepare a list of essential prescription drugs and related products to inform the development of a
national formulary that will establish the scope of prescription drugs and related products to which
Canadians should have access under national universal pharmacare.
Upon completion of this list, the Minister must initiate discussions with provinces, territories,
Indigenous peoples and other partners and stakeholders with the aim of continuing to work toward
the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
2. develop, in collaboration with partners and stakeholders, a national bulk purchasing strategy.
The Minister must request the CDA complete the list and strategy no later than the first anniversary
of the day on which this Act receives royal assent.
Appropriate Use Strategy
Work to advance a pan-Canadian strategy for appropriate use began in March 2023, with the launch
of an Advisory Committee to inform the strategy and a corresponding program.
An Appropriate Use Strategy section commits the Minister to:
ensuring that a pan-Canadian strategy for appropriate use is published no later than one year after
royal assent of the Act and,
requesting that the CDA prepare reports every three years on the progress made in advancing the
strategy.
Committee of Experts
The Minister must, within 30 days of the day on which this Act receives royal assent, establish a
committee of experts, and provide for its membership, to make recommendations respecting
options for the operation and financing of national, universal, single-payer pharmacare.
The committee must, no later than the first anniversary of the day on which this Act receives royal
assent, provide a written report to the Minister setting out its recommendations.
Summary of Next Steps
Should this Bill be passed:
The Minister will establish a committee of experts, within thirty days of the day after this Act
receives royal assent. Appointment of committee members would be shared publicly.
Ministerial outreach will commence on next steps, including discussions with provinces and
territories regarding bilateral agreements.
The Minister will request that within one year on which this Act receives royal assent, the Canadian
Drug Agency:
prepare a list of essential prescription drugs and related products to inform the development of a
national formulary, and
develop a national bulk purchasing strategy.
Initiatives that are underway related to affordable prescription medicines in Prince Edward Island,
efforts under the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, and work by the Canadian Drug
Agency, will all continue and will be evaluated for their lessons learned for national universal
pharmacare in Canada.
Backgrounder: Universal Access to Contraception
February 29, 2024
Today, the Honourable Mark Holland, Minister of Health, announced the Government of Canada’s
next step toward national universal pharmacare with the introduction of Bill C-64, An Act respecting
pharmacare, into Parliament, and the intention to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a
range of contraception medications and devices in collaboration with provinces and territories
(PTs).
Contraceptives
Contraception, also known as birth control, is used to prevent pregnancy. In Canada, there are
more than 9 million people of reproductive age, nearly one quarter of the Canadian population.
Contraceptive drugs were chosen as part of this next step of universal pharmacare specifically
because improved access to contraception improves equality. It reduces the risk of unintended
pregnancies and improves reproductive rights.
Cost has been identified by Canadian contraceptive care providers as the single most important
barrier to access to these medications. Oral contraceptives cost approximately $25 per unit, or
$300 per year. Intrauterine Devices (IUDs), which are effective for five years, cost approximately up
to $500 per unit.
Cost can discourage people both from accessing contraception, and from choosing more effective
methods of contraception with a higher upfront cost. For example, oral contraceptives have a
typical use failure rate of 9% compared to 0.20% for IUDs. Not having affordable access to effective
contraception can increase the risk of unintended pregnancies, which can impact life plans such
as going to school and advancing in one’s career.
Some populations are disproportionally affected by the lack of coverage. Women, people with low
incomes and young people, all of whom are all more likely to work in part‑time or contract
positions, often lack access to private coverage. One study found that women and girls from lower-
income households are more likely to use less-effective contraceptive methods or no contraceptive
method.
Although most drug plans list a range of contraceptive products, only a fraction of Canadians are
eligible for prescription birth control at low or no cost through a public drug plan. If they do not have
drug coverage through an employment-based private health benefit plan, Canadians would
typically have access to only a public safety net coverage plan intended to protect residents from
very high drug costs. The high deductibles under these plans (e.g., 3-20% of household income), in
addition to co-payments, mean these plans typically offer little relief for routine drug expenses,
such as contraception.
Studies have demonstrated that publicly funded no-cost universal contraception can result in
public cost savings. Evidence from the University of British Columbia (BC) estimated that no- cost
contraception has the potential to save the BC health care system approximately $27 million per
year.
Types of Contraceptives Being Covered
Today’s announcement will ensure that, following agreement with PTs, people in Canada will have
access to a comprehensive suite of contraceptive drugs and devices to choose from according to
their medical suitability and personal circumstances.
This includes oral contraceptives, copper and hormonal IUDs, injections, implants, rings, and
morning-after pills.
The Government of Canada will be launching discussions with PTs on providing universal, single-
payer coverage based on the list of contraceptive drugs and devices attached to this backgrounder.
List of contraception to be discussed with provinces and territories for specific coverage
Dosage Form Brand Name Generic Name
Oral birth control pills Alesse 21 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Alesse 28 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Alysena 21 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Alysena 28 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
Dosage Form Brand Name Generic Name
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Apri 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Apri 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Audrina 21 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Audrina 28 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Aviane 21 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Aviane 28 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Brevicon 0.5/35 (21) ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 0.5 mg
Brevicon 0.5/35 (28) ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 0.5 mg
Brevicon 1/35 (21) ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 1 mg
Brevicon 1/35(28) ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 1 mg
Drospirenone and Ethinyl Estradiol Tablets ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Drospirenone and Ethinyl Estradiol Tablets 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Drospirenone and Ethinyl Estradiol Tablets 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Freya 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Freya 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Jencycla norethindrone 0.35 mg
Linessa 21 ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg
desogestrel 0.1/ 0.125/ 0.15 mg
Linessa 28 ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg
desogestrel 0.1/ 0.125/ 0.15 mg
Marvelon 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
Dosage Form Brand Name Generic Name
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Marvelon 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Min-Ovral 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
Levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Min-Ovral 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Mirvala 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Mirvala 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Movisse norethindrone 0.35 mg
Mya ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Ovima 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Ovima 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Portia 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Portia 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Synphasic 21 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 0.5/ 1 mg
Synphasic 28 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 0.5/ 1 mg
Tri-Cira 21 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tri-Cira 28 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tri-Jordyna 21 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tri-Jordyna 28 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/ 0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tricira-Lo 21 ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tricira-Lo 28 ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg
Dosage Form Brand Name Generic Name
norgestimate 0.18/ 0.215/ 0.25 mg
Triquilar 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.05/ 0.075/ 0.125 mg
Triquilar 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.05/ 0.075/ 0.125 mg
Yasmin 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Yasmin 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Yaz ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Zamine 21 thinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Zamine 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Copper IUD Flexi-T 300
Flexi-T +300
Flexi-T 380
Liberte UT 380 Short
Liberte UT 380 Standard
Liberte TT 380 Short
Liberte TT 380 Standard
Liberté UT 380 Silver-Copper Standard
Liberté UT 380 Silver-Copper Short
Mona Lisa 10
Mona Lisa 5 Mini
Mona Lisa 5 Standard
Mona Lisa N
Hormonal IUD Kyleena levonorgestrel 19.5 mg
Mirena levonorgestrel 52 mg
Contraceptive Injection Depo-Provera medroxyprogesterone acetate 150 mg
Hormonal Implant Nexplanon etonogestrel 68 mg
Hormonal vaginal ring Haloette etonogestrel / ethinyl
estradiol 11.7 mg / 2.7 mg
Emergency contraceptives Contingency One levonorgestrel 1.5 mg
Backup Plan One-Step levonorgestrel 1.5 mg
Plan B levonorgestrel 1.5 mg
Backgrounder: Universal Access to Diabetes
Medications, and Diabetes Device Fund for Devices and Supplies
February 29, 2024
Today, the Honourable Mark Holland, Minister of Health, announced the Government of Canada’s
next step toward the first phase of national universal pharmacare with the introduction of Bill C-64,
An Act respecting pharmacare, into Parliament, and the intention to provide universal, single-payer
coverage for a range of diabetes medications in collaboration with willing provinces and territories
(PTs).
In addition, the federal government is announcing its intention to establish a fund to enable work
with PT partners to support Canadians’ access to supplies that diabetics require to manage and
monitor their condition and administer their medication, such as syringes and glucose test strips.
Diabetes medications
Diabetes is one of the most common chronic diseases affecting people living in Canada. Around
3.7 million people in Canada, or 9.4% of the population, live with diagnosed diabetes. The number
of people living with diabetes has doubled over the last decade and is expected to continue to
increase as Canada's population ages and grows.
In 2015, 25% of Canadians with diabetes indicated following their treatments were affected by
cost, in some cases rationing medications to save money. Uncontrolled diabetes can have very
serious short and long-term health impacts and represents a burden to individuals, families, and
Canadian society. High and unnecessary costs are incurred from lost productivity and elevated
health-care system use due to diabetes and its complications, including heart attack, stroke,
kidney failure, blindness and amputation. The full cost of diabetes to the healthcare system in 2018
is estimated to be around $27 billion and could exceed $39 billion by 2028.
Diabetes is a chronic condition that develops when the body either does not produce or effectively
use insulin, which it needs to turn sugar into energy. Diabetes can lead to serious health
complications if not properly managed.
Diabetes disproportionately affects certain populations within Canada. Evidence shows that First
Nations and Métis people, and people of African, East Asian and South Asian ethnic backgrounds
have higher rates of Type 2 diabetes compared to the general population.
There are three major types of diabetes, each with different causes and sometimes different
treatments:
Type 1 diabetes happens when the body stops producing insulin. Type 1 diabetes usually develops
in childhood or early adulthood. About 5 to 10% of people living with diabetes have type 1.
Type 2 diabetes happens when the body does not make enough insulin or does not respond well to
the insulin it makes. People usually receive a diagnosis for Type 2 diabetes after the age of 40, but it
is becoming more common in younger people. About
90% to 95% of people living with diabetes have type 2.
Gestational diabetes is a form of diabetes that develops during pregnancy and disappears after
delivery. Gestational diabetes develops in about 10% of pregnancies.
There is currently no cure for diabetes, but some treatments may help to manage it and improve
quality of life.
Types of Diabetes Medications Being Covered
Today’s announcement would ensure that, following agreement with PTs, diabetics in Canada will
have access to first-line treatments for diabetes that lower blood glucose levels, including:
Insulin, which is used by patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Insulin can cost in the range of
$900-$1,700 per year, depending on the type and dosage required.
Metformin, which is used by patients with type 2 diabetes. Metformin can cost about
$100 per year.
Medications often used in combination with insulin and metformin by patients with type 2 diabetes,
including Sulfonylureas, and SGLT-2 inhibitors. The cost of these medications can range from
approximately $100 to over $1,000 per year.
Existing drug insurance coverage for diabetes medications and supplies varies widely across
Canada. All PTs include many of the commonly-prescribed drugs to treat diabetes on their
formularies although the cost to the patient can vary greatly.
Improving the affordability of these medications will improve the health of Canadians living with
diabetes and reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications such as blindness or
amputations.
The Government of Canada will be launching discussions with PTs on providing universal, single-
payer coverage based on the list of diabetes drugs attached to this backgrounder.
List of diabetes medications to be discussed with PTs for specific coverage
Drug Class Brand Names Generic Names
Combination Formulations Synjardy Empagliflozin & metformin
Jentadueto Linagliptin & metformin
Komboglyze Saxagliptin & metformin
Insulins Trurapi, Kirsty Aspart biosimilar
Apidra Glulisine
Admelog Lispro biosimilar
Humulin R, Novolin ge Toronto Regular, Human
Entuzity Concentrated Regular, Human
Hypurin Regular Insulin Pure Pork regular insulin
Hypurin Nph Insulin Isophane Pork Insulin Isophane, Pork Pure
Humulin-N, Novolin GE NPH Isophane Human, NPH
Levemir Detemir
Basaglar Glargine biosimilar
Semglee Glargine biosimilar
Humulin 30/70, Novolin 30/70 Reg-Isophane, NPH Human
Insulin Secretagogues Diamicron MR Gliclazide
Glyburide
Biguanides Glucophage Metformin
SGLT2 Inhibitors Forxiga Dapagliflozin
Diabetes devices and supplies
Canadians using insulin require the necessary equipment to administer their medication. This can
include syringes, insulin pens and pen tips, or insulin pumps and supplies such as insertion sets
and insulin cartridges.
People living with diabetes must also closely monitor their blood sugar levels to ensure their sugar
levels are in a safe range, and to adjust their medication as needed. Equipment to monitor sugar
levels can include glucometers, test strips and lancets, as well as flash and continuous glucose
monitoring devices (CGM). Use of CGM or Flash GM devices leads to fewer complications and
reduces long-term costs associated with hospitalization.
These devices and supplies can cost thousands of dollars per year. All PTs offer some form of
coverage or financial assistance for diabetes-related medical devices and supplies but the
programs vary in terms of the support provided and eligibility.
Separate from Bill C-64, the federal government is announcing its intention to establish a fund to
support access to diabetes devices and supplies. Further details regarding this fund will be
provided following discussions with PT partners, who will be essential partners to its roll out.
