Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:25.678575
Name: Report_an_incident_involving_a_consumer_product_or_cosmetic:_Overview
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/report-incident.html
Package ID: cb2b4691-b651-4f7b-8476-e14d60c2393f
Keywords: ['consumer products', 'cosmetics', 'report an incident', 'reporting injuries', 'safety concerns', 'overview']
Notes: Reporting injuries, near misses and safety concerns about consumer products and cosmetics is easy and could save lives. Learn what to report and how to report. 
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Report an incident involving a consumer product or cosmetic: overview - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Report an incident involving a consumer product or cosmetic: overview Overview Report an incident - consumers Report an incident - industry Report an incident - fire and safety authorities Reporting other issues, contact us Resources Reporting injuries, near misses and safety concerns about consumer products and cosmetics is easy and could save lives. Learn what to report and how to report. On this page Why it's important to report Who can report When to report What to report Types of products to report What might happen Why it's important to report Many injuries can be prevented. By sharing your story about consumer products and cosmetics that may cause harm, you can help us stop similar incidents or injuries from happening to other children and families. Sharing your story helps us monitor the safety of products and how they're used. We use your reports to help us look into possible dangers. If there are dangers, we take action to help keep you and those you care about safe. Who can report Anyone can report an incident related to a consumer product or cosmetic. Reporting by consumers is voluntary. Parents and caregivers can report on behalf of their child or someone they care for. Health care professionals can encourage their patients to report or they can submit a report on behalf of their patients. Fire and safety authorities can also report a problem with a consumer product. In this case, they would report products for situations involving fire, smoke or overheating. Industry (manufacturers, importers, sellers) must report health or safety incidents involving a consumer product. This requirement is outlined in Section 14 of the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act. However, reporting is voluntary for health or safety issues involving a cosmetic. When to report You should report a product if: someone has been injured or nearly injured, has a bad reaction or dies from using it property has been damaged the product may harm someone because it doesn't work like it's supposed to safety instructions or labels appear to be missing, confusing or wrong you suspect that there has been a violation of the animal testing ban on cosmetics What to report You should share: what happened and when what the product is and where you got it any injuries or near misses that occurred and if treatment was needed photos of the product, product labels and injury or property damage caused by the product the web address (URL) and/or other identifying numbers, such as the Amazon Standard Identification Number (ASIN) and product number, if the product was purchased online how to contact you for more details about the incident (only if we need to) Types of products to report You may report an incident involving any consumer product or cosmetic, such as: household chemicals furniture and lighting creams and cleansers batteries and chargers appliances and devices clothing and accessories makeup and moisturizers children's products and toys sporting and athletic products What might happen Reporting might result in: monitoring for similar situations products being reviewed for safety warnings and safety alerts being issued products being recalled, which may involve them being fixed, replaced or taken off the market The more people who report, with more complete information, the more it informs actions that can be taken. Find information on recalls, advisories and safety alerts. Page details Date modified: 2024-11-01 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy