Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:15.969954
Name: Compliance_Verification_Project_2020-2021:_Children's_Jewellery_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/compliance-verification-project-2020-2021-childrens-jewellery-regulations.html
Package ID: cef2f00b-4826-4881-abd4-3d9ffef3233e
Keywords: ['Consumer-Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', "Children's Jewellery Regulations", 'compliance verification project', "children's jewellery", 'lead', 'cadmium']
Notes: The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and regulations made under it. The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify compliance of children's jewellery for lead and cadmium content which are subject to the Children's Jewellery Regulations (Regulations).
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Compliance Verification Project 2020-2021: Children's Jewellery Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Compliance Verification Project 2020-2021: Children's Jewellery Regulations Fiscal Year 2020-2021 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and regulations made under it. The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify compliance of children's jewellery for lead and cadmium content which are subject to the Children's Jewellery Regulations (Regulations). For this project, compliance of select children's jewellery with the Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors contacted establishments and sampled relevant products. Compliance to the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CV project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of children's jewellery stakeholders in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Targeted samples were also identified if they were available in Europe as this project was completed with the cooperation of various regulators in European Union/European Economic Area (EU/EEA). Over the course of the 2020-2021 fiscal year, lead and cadmium testing of 36 different products were carried out, 7 of which were available for sale in the EU/EEA. The testing resulted in 6 recalls, including 2 products available for sale in the EU/EEA. There were 30 instances where no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Baluchon Junior girls' necklace with button and bird charm pendants Baluchon Accessoires Did not meet the allowable lead and cadmium concentration requirement Voluntary Recall by Baluchon Accessoires Baluchon Junior Girl Ladybug Ring Baluchon Accessoires No compliance issues detected None CHARM IT! Unicorn Charm Catcher Necklace Mastermind Toys No compliance issues detected None Charmalong Cat Rhodium Charm Michaels Canada No compliance issues detected None Cra Z Art Shimmer N Sparkle Gem Jewelry Machine The Calendar Club No compliance issues detected None Craft Tastic Craft- Tastic Charm Bracelet - English Edition Toys R Us No compliance issues detected None Creativity for kids / Faber-Castell Rhinestone Rings Castle Toys (found on Best Buy) No compliance issues detected None Creativity for kids / Faber-Castell Emoji Bracelets Castle Toys (found on Best Buy) No compliance issues detected None CTG Brands Inc. Kool Charmz Links March-Aquamarine CTG Brands Inc. Did not meet the allowable lead concentration requirement Voluntary Recall by CTG Brands Inc. CTG Brands Inc. Kool Magnetic Charmz Link CTG Brands Inc. No compliance issues detected None Disney's Frozen II Disney Frozen Elements With Swarovski Jewelry Set Walmart Inc. No compliance issues detected None Djeco Lovely Surprise Necklace – Swan Hip Baby No compliance issues detected None Fashion Angels Crystal Clear Necklace Design Kit Michaels Canada No compliance issues detected None Great Pretenders Great Pretenders Charm-ed & Chain Bracelet Owls Hollow Toys & Games No compliance issues detected None Great Pretenders Brilliant and Unique Pendant Set Galerie du jouet No compliance issues detected None Great Pretenders Sisters Necklace Set Indigo Books & Music Inc. No compliance issues detected None Great Pretenders Junior Girl's Necklace Ojeux No compliance issues detected None H&M Hennes & Mauritz Inc. Jewelry Gift Box - Glittery purple/unicorn H&M Hennes & Mauritz Inc. No compliance issues detected None Kindred Spirits Collection L'il Anne Charm Necklace The Anne of Green Gables Store No compliance issues detected None Make it Real Charmed & Chain Bracelet Ojeux No compliance issues detected None Nebulous Stars Nebulous stars: Mini Charm Sets Castello Toy Store Did not meet the allowable cadmium concentration requirement Voluntary Recall by Agence Tween Team Next Style Next Style Charm and Chain Jewelry Walmart Inc. No compliance issues detected None PBI Fun Art Jewelry Boutique Castello Toy Store No compliance issues detected None SES Creative Giant Bead Set Boutique Griffon No compliance issues detected None SkyWiseWin Unicorn Pendant Necklace for Children Amazon Canada Did not meet the allowable cadmium concentration requirement Voluntary Recall by Amazon Canada STMT STMT Slider Charm Jewelry Indigo Books & Music Inc. No compliance issues detected None TAMHOO Earring set Amazon Canada Did not meet the allowable lead and cadmium concentration requirement Voluntary Recall by Amazon Canada The Children's Place Girls Jeweled Flower Double Band Metal Headband The Children's Place No compliance issues detected None The Children's Place Girls Rainbow Ombre Heart Locket Necklace 3-Pack The Children's Place No compliance issues detected None Unknown Panda Necklace in a Box Mastermind Toys No compliance issues detected None Unknown Mood Necklace – Shark Ocean Wise at Vancouver Aquarium Gift Shop No compliance issues detected None Unknown Mood Ring (Emoji) Gingersnap Kids General Store No compliance issues detected None Unknown You are Magical Unicorn Necklace La Licornerie Did not meet the allowable lead and cadmium concentration requirement Voluntary Recall by La Licornerie Unknown Unicorn Mood Ring La Licornerie No compliance issues detected None Unknown Necklace with Puppy Charm Scholastic Canada Ltd. No compliance issues detected None Unknown Necklace Robot Ingenium Boutique No compliance issues detected None Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2021-12-06 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy