Created: 2024-09-27T17:45:15.712222
Name: Committee_of_The_Whole_Appearance__Main_Estimates_Minister_of_Mental_Health_and_Addictions_
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/cfee24de-a3a5-4d9b-be69-2b9490c66b30/resource/186c29b4-9bf3-49d1-b545-157fa9b1f856/download/cotw-saks-eng.pdf
Package ID: cfee24de-a3a5-4d9b-be69-2b9490c66b30
Keywords: ['Health', 'committee', 'Main Estimates']
Notes: Committee of The Whole Appearance  Main Estimates
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions 

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Committee of The Whole Appearance
Main Estimates
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
May 29, 2024
Appearance before the Committee of the Whole - Main Estimates
May 29, 2024
Contents
PART A. KEY LINES DECRIMINALIZATION
1. Decriminalization Support for decriminalization
2. Toronto Public Health
If pressed on why it took so long to make a decision
3. Lessons Learned from BC
1) The B.C. request
2) Local Bylaws for Public Use
4. Delay in Responding to BC’s Request
5.Criticism that the exemption is leading to more overdose deaths If pressed on future requests
from other jurisdictions
If Pressed on International Jurisdictions
HARM REDUCTION
6. CDSS Approach and Effectiveness
7. Harm Reduction
If pressed on Harm Reduction
8. Emergency Treatment Fund
9. Impact of Federal Funding
10. B2024 Proposals on Amendments to the CDSA
11. The Effectiveness of Supervised Consumption Sites
12. General Lines on Prescribed Alternatives
13. Who is responsible for delivering Prescribed Alternative projects?
If pressed on studies showing increasing rates of prescribing of drugs commonly used in prescribed
alternative programs:
If pressed on diversion
If pressed on diversion risk in Health Canada-funded projects If pressed on evidence
14. Prescribing “Safer Supply” for Youth
15. Closing Supervised Consumption Sites
16. Supervised Consumption Sites - Community Safety / Proximity to Schools
17. Supervised Consumption Sites - South Riverdale Community Health Centre (SRCHC)
OPIOID CRISIS (OTHER)
18. Involuntary Treatment
19. Funding for Prevention
20. Enforcement Actions
21. Collaboration with the US on the Overdose Crisis
22. Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) Funding
23. Litigation Against Pharmaceutical Companies
24. Declaration of a Public Health Emergency
25. Implementing the Expert Task Force on Substance Use (ETFSU) Recommendations
26. Support for Indigenous Communities
27. Support for Rural and Remote Communities
28. Housing Insecurity/Homelessness and Substance Use
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUICIDE PREVENTION
29. Federal Funding for Mental Health and Substance Use (MHSU)
If Pressed on Mental Health Transfer (refer to Bilateral Funding to PTs) 30. 9-8-8
If pressed on funding
If pressed on how calls and texts are routed If pressed on privacy and confidentiality
If pressed on police services
If pressed on monitoring, reporting, and data
31. Mental Health for Children, Youth and Students If pressed on Student Mental Health
32. Integrated Youth Services
If pressed on the Healthcare Funding Announcement and Integrated Youth Services
33. Budget 2024 – Youth Mental Health Fund
If pressed on the relationship between the new fund and the Bilateral Agreements
34. Mental Health of Black and Other Racialized Canadians
If pressed on mental health investments supporting racialized Canadians
35. National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
36. Suicide Prevention
37. SOCI Report on the Effectiveness of the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention
38. Timeline for Release
39. Wellness Together Canada (WTC) Transition If pressed
CANNABIS, SMOKING & TOBACCO
40. Cannabis
If pressed on legislative review
If pressed on Review of the Medical Access Regime
If pressed on complaints regarding personal production with Health Canada authorization If
pressed on cannabis poisonings among seniors
If pressed on paediatric cannabis poisonings
If pressed on non-compliant edible cannabis products that exceed the regulatory limit for THC If
pressed on illegal cannabis products targeted at youth
If pressed on youth-oriented public education campaign
If Pressed on Israel Initiating an Anti-Dumping Investigation on Cannabis for Medical Purposes
Imported from Canada
41. Smoking and Tobacco Use
If pressed on help for persons who smoke If pressed on youth vaping
If pressed on flavours regulations If pressed on the legislative review
If pressed on tobacco cost recovery
If pressed on tobacco labelling regulations If pressed on a smoke-free generation
42. Budget Proposal on the Tobacco Cost Recovery Framework
PART B. Key Stats
43. Key Stats
PART C. Supplemental
44. Main Estimates
45. Recent OPQs
PART A. KEY LINES DECRIMINALIZATION
1. Decriminalization
The Government supports an approach that will help to divert people who use drugs away from the
criminal justice system and towards appropriate health and social services, while keeping
communities safe.
Addiction is not a criminal act. It is a health issue and must be treated as such if we want to find
lasting solutions.
A long line of experts agree that the war on drugs has been ineffective and harmful for people who
use drugs. The threat of imprisonment is an ineffective deterrent against drug use.
In fact, evidence shows criminalization fuels stigma and leads to increased harms. It can act as a
barrier to seeking health services.
We also know that criminalization of people who use substances has a disproportionate impact on
black and Indigenous people, exacerbating inequalities and drug-related harms.
Support for decriminalization
A broad range of stakeholders have called for the decriminalization of personal possession as one
part of a comprehensive strategy, including: Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police, Canadian
Nurses Association, Canadian Society of Addiction Medicine, and the First Nations Health
Authority.
This is in addition to a variety of drug policy experts and stakeholders, the United Nations, as well as
municipalities and medical officers of health.
2. Toronto Public Health
I refused the request from Toronto Public Health because it did not adequately protect public
health and maintain public safety. This includes concerns with:
feasibility and ability for law enforcement to implement the proposed model,
protection of youth, and
lack of support from key players, including the Province of Ontario
We remain committed to addressing substance use as a health issue first and foremost and will
continue working with all partners to find lasting solutions to this terrible crisis.
If pressed on why it took so long to make a decision
All exemption requests are considered on a case-by-case basis, taking into account all relevant
considerations, including health and safety.
Officials worked with Toronto Public Health to seek key information on their request. Toronto Public
Health only recently confirmed they had responded to Health Canada’s questions to the best of
their ability.
I made a decision once officials brought forth a decision package to my attention.
3. Lessons Learned from BC
Changing laws alone is not sufficient. To be successful, decriminalization needs to be
accompanied by implementing a comprehensive suite of actions. These actions include:
Pathways that can be used to re-direct people from the criminal justice system to the health and
social systems;
Comprehensive health and social supports for people who are diverted, when and where they need
it;
Law enforcement readiness to be able to divert people who use drugs away from the justice system
and towards health supports;
Ongoing and clear public education and communications of the rules in place to protect health and
safety, for example, where or when public use will not be tolerated, as with any other drug or
substance use like alcohol, cannabis, or tobacco;
Ongoing engagement to understand relevant concerns being raised so that they can be addressed
in a timely manner.
The need for these additional complementary actions is precisely why my predecessor sent a Letter
of Requirements with the original exemption, setting out the Government’s expectations in terms of
the full suite of actions necessary for BC to take to support successful implementation.
The war on drugs hasn’t worked. To find solutions to this crisis, it is necessary to be bold and try
new approaches, monitor them rigorously, and then follow the data and evidence.
That is why in the case of BC, we have set out the requirement for BC to monitor its new approach,
in addition to an arm’s length 3rd party evaluation that is measuring impacts and outcomes.
As the first exemption of its kind in Canada, there was always an understanding that adjustments
may need to be made along the way. We are working with BC to do that.
1.The B.C. request
From the outset we’ve been clear: BC’s exemption could and would be adjusted if needed. At BC’s
request, we’re doing just that.
We approved their request because everyone deserves to feel safe in their communities.
Our government will continue to support approaches that help divert people away from the criminal
justice system and towards health and social services.
We remain ready to support BC as they work to fight the toxic drug and overdose crisis across the
province.
2. Local Bylaws for Public Use
The exemption granted to BC does not change the ability of local governments to pass or amend
their bylaws as they know the best needs of their community and how to respond to it.
We continue to work relentlessly to reduce substance use related harms.
We will continue to work with BC and respond to the challenges posed by toxic drug and overdose
crisis in the province.
4. Delay in Responding to BC’s Request
BC’s amendment request was reviewed expeditiously and responsibly, while making sure to
consider possible impacts.
All exemption requests must thoroughly consider public health and public safety objectives and the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
I took the time needed to consult with BC following receipt of their letter and once I received the
necessary information from them, I moved quickly to make and communicate my decision.
5. Criticism that the exemption is leading to more overdose deaths
It is inaccurate to claim that this exemption is the cause of an increase in overdose deaths.
This exemption was in place for a little over a year in one single province.
The overdose crisis was declared in BC in 2016, with further devastating increases seen during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Provinces across the country, using a variety of strategies, are also experiencing significant and
tragic increases in overdose deaths.
We know from available data that overdose deaths in this country are being fueled by a toxic and
highly potent illegal drug supply.
This is an extremely complex health crisis. Addressing it will take a full suite of actions across the
continuum of care while also continuing to protect community safety.
If pressed on future requests from other jurisdictions
We are committed to saving lives and connecting people to health and social services and
supports.
Exemption requests are reviewed on a case by case basis, taking into account a range of factors
including public health and public safety.
The support or opposition of key stakeholders whose cooperation is important to implementation,
is another key factor.
We continue to use all tools at our disposal to address this crisis, including efforts to divert people
away from the criminal justice system to appropriate health and social services, while maintaining
community safety.
If Pressed on International Jurisdictions
From an international perspective, over 30 countries have some form of model in place lifting
criminal penalties for the possession of small amounts of drugs.
These include the following countries:
Germany
Portugal
Spain
Switzerland
Netherlands
Australia’s Australian Capital Territory
Czech Republic
Italy
Mexico
Argentina
Colombia
Croatia
HARM REDUCTION
6. CDSS Approach and Effectiveness
Guided by the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS) since 2016, the Government of
Canada has taken urgent action to address the overdose crisis through significant investments of
over $1 billion. Under the renewed CDSS, which was launched on October 30, 2023, federal actions
continue to support people by focusing on several related priorities, including:
improving access to a full range of substance use services and supports to meet the diverse needs
of people who use substances, including harm reduction, treatment and recovery services;
streamlining authorizations to increase access to life-saving harm reduction services, including
supervised consumption sites and drug checking;
supporting a range of innovative approaches to address substance use-related harms at the
community level;
strengthening law enforcement and border services capacity to address illegal drug production and
trafficking;
increasing efforts to prevent, reduce and delay substance use and related harms in youth; and,
investments in research and surveillance build the evidence base to provide accurate, timely and
reliable data to inform policy development and decision-making.
Our model is a comprehensive framework guiding our efforts to address the toxic drug and
overdose crisis, centered on promoting public health and protecting public safety.
It also supports ongoing education activities to reduce stigma and provides funding to community-
led projects targeting populations disproportionally impacted by substance use harms.
7. Harm Reduction
Harm reduction is health care and a pathway to care for many people.
We are focused on supporting a full range of services and supports to address the diverse needs of
people who use drugs, as well as enforcement efforts to protect our communities.
This is not the time to be pitting harm reduction against treatment. The truth is, we need them
both—and more.
Our government has invested over $200 billion to support provinces and territories delivering
services needed in addition to the $1 billion we have directly invested to address this crisis.
We will use every tool at our disposal to end the toxic drug and overdose crisis.
If pressed on Harm Reduction
No community has been left untouched by this crisis and too many people have lost family, friends
and loved ones.
We’re supporting education activities to reduce stigma and provide funding to community-led
projects targeting those most impacted by substance use harms.
We’ll keep working to ensure people who use drugs, no matter their circumstance, have the
resources and support they need when they need it.
Other Harm Reduction Tools:
Naloxone (distribution)
Supervised Consumption Sites
Prescribed alternatives
Drug checking services
Peer-to-peer support workers programs to help those with lived and living experience
8.Emergency Treatment Fund
Budget 2024 announced the commitment of $150 million over three years, starting in 2024/2025 for
a fund that would be open to municipalities and Indigenous communities to help provide a rapid
response to emergent, critical needs related to the overdose crisis.
We hope to have this fund available to communities who meet eligibility requirements later this
year.
I also want to note that the federal budget 2024 includes commitments for complementary
initiatives related to substance use, including:
$630.2 million over two years, starting this year, for Indigenous Services Canada to support
Indigenous people’s access to mental health services, including through distinctions-based mental
wellness strategies; and
an additional $1.3 billion over four years, starting this year, for Infrastructure Canada’s Reaching
Home: Canada’s Homelessness Strategy to address, among other issues, the urgent issue of
encampments and unsheltered homelessness.
9. Impact of Federal Funding
Further to the $150 million in funding we provided through the Emergency Treatment Fund in 2018,
several provinces and territories reported important progress, including a reduction in the average
wait times to access opioid use disorder treatment.
In the Northwest Territories, average wait times for opioid agonist therapy were reduced from 5-7
days in July 2019 to approximately 1 day after October 2019.
In Newfoundland and Labrador, average wait times for opioid agonist therapy after referral were
reduced from an average of 4-5 weeks in September 2018, to a consistent 1-2 days from 2019-
2023.
In Saskatchewan, the average wait time to access an opioid agonist therapy prescriber in
Saskatoon fell by 86% (from 20.7 days in 2018-2020 to 2.8 days in 2022-23).
10. B2024 Proposals on Amendments to the CDSA
The Government of Canada is committed to taking actions to address the unrelenting and tragic
toxic illegal drug and overdose crisis that has left no community in the country untouched.
Supervised consumption and drug checking services help to save lives. They are an important
evidence-based part of Canada’s comprehensive public health response to addressing substance
use harms and the overdose crisis.
Despite the life-saving services offered by supervised consumption and drug checking services,
they continue to operate pursuant to case-by-case exemptions.
The proposed amendments to the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act would allow for
regulations to be developed so that supervised consumption and drug checking services can be
authorized through a structured system with clear requirements and procedures. This is expected
to give more stability and transparency for service providers, while maintaining strict controls to
protect public safety.
There will be broad consultation as part of regulatory development to make sure all views are
considered.
11. The Effectiveness of Supervised Consumption Sites
There are 38 SCS in Canada. Since 2017, they’ve received over 4.4 million visits, attended to over
53,000 overdoses, and made over 424,000 referrals to health and social services [as of October
2023].
They provide a safe space to consume drugs with clean consumption supplies, access to care and
without judgement. Many provide access to drug checking and peer support services that can help
people make informed
decisions about substances before they are consumed, decide to pursue treatment and access
other supports.
These sites reduce public drug use, the spread of diseases, and the strain on emergency services.
12. General Lines on Prescribed Alternatives
The debate regarding using prescription drugs as an alternative to deadly illegal drugs has been
characterized as being highly experimental, novel, and entirely without precedence or base of
evidence.
In fact, the practice of substituting illegal drugs with certain forms of prescription drugs in the
context of a therapeutic relationship is not at all new.
It is a practice in addiction medicine and first-line treatment for opioid addiction that has existed for
decades in several countries, with positive results, significant published research, and established
safeguards and protocols for certain kinds of drugs, such as methadone, buprenorphine, and
injectable forms of prescription opioids.
What is new is the current North American context of having a supply of highly potent, deadly
synthetic drugs.
In response, some health professionals have adapted by using a wider range of drugs and models
to stabilize and save lives of their patients.
Prescribed alternatives programs are being studied by a number of researchers across Canada. We
will continue to evaluate all available and emerging evidence to improve practice and further build
the evidence base.
13. Who is responsible for delivering Prescribed Alternative projects?
Provincially regulated health professionals are responsible for prescribing medications based on a
patient’s medical needs, safety considerations, available medical guidelines, and applicable
provincial and territorial rules and regulations.
Prescription drugs used in prescribed alternative projects are largely funded from provincial drug
formularies and are bound by provincial regulation of the practice of medicine.
Health Canada is providing time-limited funding to a number of pilot projects for costs such as
hiring nurses, and funding the provision of wrap-around supports such as mental health and
housing services. Currently 22 active projects are serving approximately 3,116 clients in 3 provinces
(BC, ON, NB).
Health Canada is seeing some positive early results from PA pilot projects, including evidence of
declines in emergency department visits and hospital admissions, and reduced all cause and
overdose-related mortality.
PA program providers and clients are also reporting outcomes such as reduced overdoses, reduced
illegal drug use, and reduced engagement in criminal activities such as petty crime. We are closely
studying all new research as it emerges.
Health Canada also supports research and evaluation activities, including funding a long-term,
arms-length evaluation of prescribed alternatives pilot projects.
As these projects are a health care service under provincial and territorial jurisdiction, Health
Canada does not approve the operation of these sites.
If pressed on studies showing increasing rates of prescribing of drugs commonly used in prescribed
alternative programs:
We are aware of data showing increasing rates of prescribing hydromorphone, including one recent
study out of Quebec.
While we have data on the number of prescriptions, it does not tell us what the exact medical
purpose of these prescriptions are.
The most common use for these drugs in Canada is for the treatment of moderate to severe forms
of pain.
They are prescribed to millions of Canadians each year for this purpose. Prescribed alternatives
programs in Canada are very small by comparison.
4.69 million individuals in Canada used opioids in 2022. By comparison, federally funded
prescribed alternatives projects currently support 3,250 clients.
Its important for us to better understand prescribing data. We are closely monitoring all relevant
research and data to help inform our approach to the overdose crisis, and also ensure that pain
patients continue to receive the supports they need.
If pressed on diversion
Diversion is illegal, and something we take very seriously.
Sadly, this is not a new phenomenon.
Examples of diversion can include patients sharing or selling their own prescriptions, thefts from
pharmacies, pilferage in healthcare settings and prescription forgeries.
Governments, health care professionals and law enforcement share the responsibility of reducing
the risk of diversion and to take action when it occurs.
We are monitoring the situation closely, and taking action to help prevent diversion from federally
funded-prescribed alternatives pilot projects.
The RCMP says there is no evidence to suggest the widespread diversion of drugs from prescribed
alternatives.
If pressed on diversion risk in Health Canada-funded projects
Health Canada has worked with federally-funded prescribed alternatives pilot projects to
strengthen their operational protocols to help reduce diversion risk. Projects are also required to
report regularly to Health Canada.
Projects have implemented a number of practices to help reduce diversion risk, including:
Patient screening
Efforts to better match drugs to patient tolerance
Risk-based protocols for assessing patient eligibly for take-home dosing
Patient monitoring
Actions to address instances of diversion, which can include:
switching to observed dosing;
transfer into a different support services; or
removal from program.
In January, Health Canada hosted an expert roundtable on assessing, measuring and mitigating
diversion risk related to these services.
Officials also convened federally-funded projects in February to review their protocols, share the
latest evidence and ensure they are implementing promising practices
In addition, we continue to support the evaluation of projects, to inform our actions moving
forward.
These actions are important to mitigate risks. At the same time, I recognize we will need to continue
to closely monitor these projects and analyse the evidence to inform our way forward and any
further adjustments that may be needed.
If pressed on evidence
Prescribed alternatives projects are being studied by a number of researchers across Canada.
Some promising early outcomes include evidence of reduced overdose mortality and
hospitalizations, as well as client and provider reports of reduced illegal drug use, improved access
to health and social services, and reduced engagement in criminal activity.
We are also aware of some concerns, such as diversion, and we take these reports seriously.
We recognize that there are differing views among experts.
I met with, and received letters from, physicians, researchers and practitioners calling for changes
to prescribed alternatives programs, as well as those calling for increased support.
We are working with federally-funded pilot projects so that they are implementing strong diversion
mitigation practices and reporting on these regularly to Health Canada.
We will continue to evaluate all available and emerging evidence, and listen and engage with
experts with various views, to learn from current experiences and inform this practice moving
forward.
14. Prescribing “Safer Supply” for Youth
Prescribing guidelines have been developed by experts at the BC Centre on Substance Use, and
apply in the Province of BC.
The guidelines make specific references to additional precautions that should be taken if a medical
practitioner is considering this intervention for young people who are using drugs from the toxic
illegal drug supply.
Health Canada did not play a role in their development, nor does Health Canada have a role in
approving medical practice guidelines.
The decision to provide any kind of medical intervention to a patient is a choice for medical
practitioners and patients to make based on a patient’s medical needs, safety considerations,
available medical guidelines, and applicable provincial and territorial rules and regulations.
To be clear – prescribed alternative projects are meant for people who are already using illegal
drugs and are at-high risk of overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply in Canada.
When it comes to young people, we can all agree that maximum efforts must be made to prevent
drug use from starting in the first place. At the federal level, we continue to support a number of
youth-focused prevention initiatives to help increase awareness of the dangers of substance use,
including:
developing tools to prevent substance-related harms among youth in school;
the "Know More" awareness campaign which aims to engage teens and young adults on the facts
surrounding opioids and ways to reduce risks; and
a new Youth Substance Use Prevention Program
15. Closing Supervised Consumption Sites
Supervised consumption sites (SCS) reduce the number of drug related harms and improve the
health of people who use drugs. Since 2017, SCS in Canada have responded to over 53,000
overdoses and have seen over 4.4 million visits.
Closing supervised consumption sites would mean increasing the risk of more deaths, diseases
and infections and less access to a range of other health and social services that people rely on.
Harm reduction is health care and a pathway to care for many people. We are focused on
supporting a full range of services and supports to address the diverse needs of people who use
drugs, as well as enforcement efforts to protect our communities.
We know that SCS can be inaccessible or unavailable especially in rural, remote, and Indigenous
communities and do not typically operate 24/7 or support all modes of consumption where they do
exist.
We must work with other levels of Government and partners to implement innovative solutions,
including virtual supports, to ensure more people who use drugs have access to services to prevent
overdose deaths.
16. Supervised Consumption Sites - Community Safety / Proximity to Schools
Everyone deserves to feel safe and welcome in their community.
All levels of government have a shared responsibility and need to work together so that there are
safe environments for our children, while we also provide these evidence-based, life-saving
services.
Supervised consumption sites must conduct community consultation and specify how community
concerns will be mitigated.
Sites are also required to have processes in place for ongoing community engagement and to take
appropriate mitigation measures to address concerns, such as foot patrols to reduce discarded
drug use equipment in public spaces around sites.
17. Supervised Consumption Sites - South Riverdale Community Health Centre (SRCHC)
We offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of Karolina Huebner-Makurat, the
individual who lost her life.
We are deeply committed to providing evidence-based services and supports to people who use
drugs, and, in doing so, we take the health and safety of those using these services, and their
surrounding communities, very seriously.
Health Canada is in regular communication with the site and worked with them to improve
community engagement, reduce loitering and improve security around the centre.
We will continue to work with them to protect both public health and public safety.
OPIOID CRISIS (OTHER)
18. Involuntary Treatment
The evidence is clear, to reduce the harms associated with substance use, a full continuum of
supports is necessary to meet people where they are at, including treatment for those who are
ready for it.
We understand that seeking treatment is an individual choice and recovery looks different for
everyone. There is no one size fits all.
Our government is committed to support a full continuum of care that is necessary for a successful
substance use strategy: Prevention, Harm Reduction, Treatment, Enforcement.
There is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of involuntary treatment, though the results of
some studies indicate that involuntary treatment can have negative impacts, including increased
risk of overdose.
We will continue to undertake and support research to build the evidence base for interventions,
including treatment approaches.
19. Funding for Prevention
Our prevention efforts are tailored to reach people most-at- risk.
For example, through Budget 2023, we committed $20.2 million for a new Youth Substance Use
Prevention Program to support communities across Canada build capacity to implement and adapt
the Icelandic Prevention Model.
The internationally recognized model focuses on building strong and healthy communities, instead
of targeting individual behaviour.
It has been shown to be effective in decreasing long-term substance use among youth.
In addition, we have invested in public education activities designed to raise awareness around the
risks of opioids, overdoses, and stigma reduction in youth and men-at-risk.
Know More Opioids engages teens and young adults on the facts surrounding opioids, ways to
reduce risks and the harms of stigma (over 178,000 interactions with people through school and
festival events between April 2018 and December 2023).
Ease the Burden campaign to raise awareness and reduce harms associated with the use of opioids
and other substances as well as stigma, especially for men in physically demanding jobs (over
22.8M views of campaign video as of December 2023).
20. Enforcement Actions
The maintenance of public health and the protection of public safety are priorities for the
Government of Canada. Under federal legislation, activities with controlled substances are illegal,
unless authorized under regulations or an exemption.
We are working closely with public safety and criminal justice partners in Canada and
internationally to:
ohelp identify and disrupt the flow of illegal drugs and precursors across our borders;
identify and address money laundering of the proceeds of illegal drug trafficking; and
investigate and charge criminal actors suspected in the manufacturing and/or trafficking of illegal
drugs.
Canada is working closely with the United States to disrupt the illegal drug supply, including
trafficking, through forums such as the North American Drug Dialogue and the Canada- US Opioids
Action Plan.
Example: Canada and the U.S. performed a joint audit of facilities and detection technology at
ports of entry along the Canada-US border to identify existing tools with a view to sharing
resources.
Example: Officers in the Canadian and U.S. Postal systems have conducted joint training in the
detection of trafficked substances.
Example: A joint Canada-U.S. initiative to target and intercept precursor chemicals from source
countries. This project focuses on precursor chemicals and clandestine laboratory equipment.
Example: We have implemented 82 safe examination areas at high-risk ports of entry to help border
services officers to identify and safely examine shipments suspected to contain opioids.
We have taken regulatory action to give law enforcement tools to take action against the illegal
importation and sale of precursor chemicals used to make synthetic drugs like fentanyl.
Those who conduct prohibited activities with controlled substances, such as trafficking or
diversion, are subject to criminal penalties. Specific questions about enforcement operations
would best be directed to my colleague, the Minister of Public Safety.
21. Collaboration with the US on the Overdose Crisis
Our government is taking strong action with our allies to disrupt the illegal drug supply globally.
Canada is active in international efforts to address drug- related issues, including trafficking,
through forums such as the North American Drug Dialogue, and in partnership with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
We work closely with the US to coordinate cross-border activities through the Canada-US Opioids
Action Plan.
Through the Trilateral Fentanyl Committee, we also collaborate with the United States and Mexico
to address the threat posed by illegal synthetic drugs, including fentanyl, in Norther America.
At a meeting on February 7, 2024, all three countries reaffirmed our commitment to address the
flow of synthetic drugs through a range of key actions, including:
Increased collaboration on the control of precursor chemicals and equipment used in illegal
production;
Developing and implementing a common baseline of drugs and substances that toxicologists in all
three countries will
test for in post-mortem toxicology reports; and
Hosting a forum to discuss strategies to assist the long-term recovery of individuals with substance
use disorders.
My Department also shares information regularly on drug trends, emerging drugs and clandestine
lab information with partners like the United States, to better track emerging substances and the
illegal market.
22. Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) Funding
We are supporting innovative and evidence informed projects to address the overdose crisis across
the country. Since 2015 we have supported close to 400 projects through the Substance Use and
Addiction Program, making a real difference in countless lives of individuals and communities.
We launched a Call for proposals in September for the funding announced in Budget 2023 and we
expect to have results to share in the coming weeks.
This is only part of our comprehensive approach, investing over $1B to fight this crisis
23. Litigation Against Pharmaceutical Companies
We are working with all provinces and territories on litigation against big pharma and those who
enabled them, and were part of the Purdue Settlement in June 2022.
Canada has also addressed pharma’s predatory practices by further restricting the marketing of
opioids and increasing maximum financial penalties.
24. Declaration of a Public Health Emergency
This Government recognizes the overdose crisis and the tragic levels of overdose deaths and harms
we are currently facing.
We are using all of our tools to take a comprehensive approach to respond to this crisis, including
significant investments of over $1 billion since 2017.
25. Implementing the Expert Task Force on Substance Use (ETFSU) Recommendations
We appreciate the excellent work of the Expert Task Force on Substance Use whose mandate was
to provide advice to inform our Government’s renewed Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy.
It is important that our actions be informed by the independent advice of experts. I have asked the
Department to reestablish an Expert Advisory Committee that would provide council and inform
and strengthen federal actions to address the overdose crisis.
This work is underway.
26. Support for Indigenous Communities
We know that Indigenous Peoples have been disproportionately impacted by the overdose crisis.
Example: In B.C. from January to June 2023, First Nations people died at six times the rate of other
B.C. residents.
Example: In Ontario, in 2021, the rate of opioid-toxicity deaths among First Nations people was
seven times higher than the rate for non-First Nations people.
Factors such as intergenerational trauma linked to colonialism and the legacy of residential
schools, systemic and institutional racism and lower socio-economic outcomes increase risks for
Indigenous Peoples.
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) is providing more than $650 million this year (2023-2024) to help
address mental wellness and substance use prevention and treatment in First Nations and Inuit
communities through its Mental Wellness Program.
The federal budget 2024 also includes commitments for complementary initiatives related to
substance use, including
$630.2 million over two years, starting this year, for Indigenous Services Canada to support
Indigenous people’s access to mental health services, including through distinctions-based mental
wellness strategies.
As part of this Government’s comprehensive approach, I am supporting my colleague, the
Honourable Patti Hajdu, Minister of ISC, in increasing access to trauma-informed, culturally
appropriate and quality substance use services and supports.
Example: Through financial support from the Substance Use and Addictions Program, Gitmo Spirit
Lodge is providing medically prescribed cannabis to members of the Natoaganeg First Nation who
are currently using opioid agonists such as methadone and suboxone to determine if this combined
medication approach helps people reduce and/or replace opioid medications.
CIHR is also supporting the creation of an Indigenous Engagement Platform, under CRISM, which
will encourage substance use research and knowledge mobilization that is grounded in Indigenous
ways of knowing, priorities and values.
27. Support for Rural and Remote Communities
People living in smaller communities experience 2.5 times higher opioid poisoning hospitalization
rates than those in Canada’s largest cities.
We know that people living in rural communities, including remote Indigenous communities, face
significantly higher barriers to accessing harm reduction and treatment services.
We continue to work with provinces and territories to support expanded access to services for all
Canadians, regardless of where they live.
Budget 2024 announced the commitment of $150 million over three years, starting this year, for an
Emergency Treatment Fund that would be open to municipalities and Indigenous communities to
help provide a rapid response to emergent, critical needs related to the overdose crisis.
Canada hopes to have this fund available to communities who meet eligibility requirements later
this year.
Through Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program, we are also working to directly
support on the ground efforts in rural and remote communities impacted by this crisis as well as
services providing virtual care.
Example: Centre for Addiction and Mental Health Virtual Integrated Collaborative Care (VICC) using
the Technology Enabled Collaborative Care (TECC) platform.
Project is an innovative care delivery design that reorganizes existing resources by using an online
platform for communication and patient-driven or provider-facilitated data entry. This leads to more
effective delivery and retention of opioid use disorder (OUD) services and treatment in high-risk
individuals with severe OUD.Example: National Overdose Response Service (NORS)
Funding will enhance virtual overdose monitoring service infrastructure and the development of a
variety of knowledge products, including guidelines for using technology-based harm reduction
services which will be developed in conjunction with the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance
Misuse (CRISM) and project evaluation.
28. Housing Insecurity/Homelessness and Substance Use
This Government recognizes that there are many contributing factors to substance use, including
housing instability and homelessness.
I am working with provincial and territorial Ministerial counterparts to identify promising
interventions to address the complex needs of people who use substances, face mental health
challenges and experience homelessness or unstable housing.
It is essential that all levels of government, with local organizations and experts work together to
provide comprehensive supports to meet the diverse needs of individuals our communities,
including those who live in vulnerable conditions.
I would like to share that the federal budget 2024 includes commitments for complementary
initiatives related to substance use, including an additional $1.3 billion over four years, starting this
year, for Infrastructure Canada’s Reaching Home: Canada’s Homelessness Strategy to address,
among other issues, the urgent issue of encampments and unsheltered homelessness.
Specific questions about housing insecurity and homelessness would best be directed to my
colleague, Minister of Housing, Infrastructure, and Communities.
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUICIDE PREVENTION
29. Federal Funding for Mental Health and Substance Use (MHSU)
We know our response to mental health is stronger when provided as part of integrated care.
We are transferring billions of dollars to provinces and territories to support health care, including
mental health care, over the coming years, through both an increase of the Canada Health Transfer,
and the new ten-year bilateral agreements – that’s an additional $25 billion.
Approximately one third of federal funding flowed through the bilateral agreements for improving
health care will be allocated by provinces and territories for mental health and substance use
services (note: the funding breakdown is not available for Quebec).
Improved access to mental health and substance use services is one of the four shared priorities in
the new bilateral agreements and integrated into the other three.
If Pressed on Mental Health Transfer (refer to Bilateral Funding to PTs)
The 2017 investment in mental health and addictions to provinces and territories have supported
the expansion of initiatives such as integrated youth services making them more accessible and
cost-effective.
We want to extend this collaborative work with transparency and accountability in order to provide
integrated mental health across all of our shared priorities with provinces and territories.
30. 9-8-8
People across Canada can now call or text 9-8-8 to have access to 24/7, bilingual, trauma-
informed, and culturally appropriate suicide prevention support.
Canadians need timely access to suicide prevention – they need to know they are not alone;
someone is there to help.
Budget 2023 announced $177 million over 3 years to launch and implement 9-8-8, a three-digit
number for suicide prevention and emotional distress.
The Helpline is available to everyone in Canada via voice and text, 24/7, 365 days a year, in both
English and French.
The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health is leading the initiative and has recruited 39 provincial
and local crisis and distress lines to the 9-8-8 network.
In February 2024, 9-8-8 received over 700 phone calls and 400 texts per day.
If you are thinking about suicide, or worried about someone thinking about suicide, call or text 9-8-
8, at any time.
To anyone who is struggling: you are not alone, help is available.
988 is meant to be a crisis line, it does not replace psychotherapy or other mental health care.
Mental health and the ongoing supports are needed beyond that moment of crisis.
If pressed on funding
Budget 2023 announced $177 million over 3 years to support the launch and implementation of 9-
8-8.
Of this investment, the Public Health Agency of Canada is providing $177 million over three years to
the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health to support the implementation and operation of 9-8-8.
The remaining $2.4 million over three years is allocated to PHAC to cover costs related to the
oversight, administration, reporting, and evaluation activities associated with 9-8-8.
If pressed on how calls and texts are routed
Calls and texts to the 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline are routed based on area codes to 9-8-8 partner
crisis and distress lines. Calls and texts will be answered as close to home as possible in the
official language selected.
The intention with 9-8-8 is to minimize disruption by leveraging existing service delivery models,
where possible.
Some specialized lines, like Kids Help Phone and Hope For Wellness, are part of the 9-8-8 network
and may offer tailored support to youth and First Nations, Inuit and Métis.
If pressed on privacy and confidentiality
People calling or texting 9-8-8 are not required to share personal information with responders.
While phone numbers may be visible to responders, location information is not tracked through 9-
8-8. All responders are required to sign confidentiality agreements.
Calls and texts may be monitored or recorded for quality assurance purposes and for the safety of
both the caller or texter, and the 9-8-8 responder.
Only aggregated, non-identifiable, data will be shared with the Government of Canada and third-
parties for monitoring and reporting purposes.
If pressed on police services
If a caller is at imminent risk of seriously harming oneself or others, there is an established protocol
for transferring a 9-8-8 call to emergency services.
Responders are trained to de-escalate a crisis and the majority of calls and texts placed to 9-8-8
will not require an emergency intervention. For example, only 3% of calls placed to Talk Suicide
Canada required emergency intervention.
CAMH continues to engage with emergency services and law enforcement stakeholders on
improvements to crisis response coordination and protocols.
If pressed on monitoring, reporting, and data
The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health will regularly share key metrics with the Public Health
Agency of Canada as part of their reporting requirements, including service volumes and wait
times.
Thousands of Canadians have reached out to 9-8-8 for support since it launched. In February 2024,
wait times averaged 18 seconds for phone calls and approximately 1 ½ minutes for texts.
31. Mental Health for Children, Youth and Students
In 2017, our government began the transfer of $5 billion over 10 years to expand mental health
services through direct bilateral agreements with provinces and territories.
Building on these investments, we are providing an additional $25 billion over 10 years to support
areas of shared priorities including mental health and substance use care, which will see Integrated
Youth Services expanded.
Budget 2024 also proposes to provide $500 million over five years, starting in 2024-25, for the
creation of a new Youth Mental Health Fund which will help younger Canadians access the mental
health care they need.
This investment will help community health organizations provide more care for younger
Canadians, and better equip these organizations to refer youth to other mental health services
within their networks and partnerships.
We are also supporting youth through a $7.5 million investment in Kids Help Phone who is offering
access to free, 24/7, confidential e-mental health support via phone, text, and live chat.
If pressed on Student Mental Health
Our Government recognizes the significant mental health challenges being faced by post-
secondary students, which have been exacerbated due to COVID-19.
We’re making sure our young people and youth are resilient and have the supports they need to
succeed – not fall through the cracks
We are committed to strengthening the mental health and well-being of students and we will
increase access to wrap- around services so that post-secondary students can get the help they
need, when and where they need it.
For example, we provided funding to the Canadian Mental Health Association to pilot a Peer
Support program in five universities that will train up to 225 campus-based peer supporters.
32. Integrated Youth Services
Our government understands the need to intervene early in ways that are easily accessible and
meet young people where they are.
We continue to work with provinces/territories, Indigenous communities, and stakeholders to help
develop and expand Integrated Youth Services (IYS), which provide a “one-stop shop” of supports in
the community for youth.
In 2022, we announced $18M to fund IYS projects and develop a “network of networks” as well as a
national data framework and infrastructure.
This is in addition to $6.4M for research to examine existing standards, best practices and
guidelines.
If pressed on the Healthcare Funding Announcement and Integrated Youth Services
We are providing $25 billion over 10 years to provinces/territories (PTs) via tailored bilateral
agreements to address shared priorities including improving access to mental health and
substance use health.
PTs could use these investments to further advance access to integrated youth services.
This investment will build on Budget 2017 investments of $5 billion to PTs for mental health &
addictions services.
33. Budget 2024 – Youth Mental Health Fund
The federal government is committed to ensuring everyone gets the mental health care they need,
and that applies especially to youth, who are facing more mental health challenges than past
generations.
Budget 2024 proposes to provide $500 million over five years, starting in 2024-25, for the creation of
a new Youth Mental Health Fund which will help younger Canadians access the mental health care
they need.
This new Fund builds on existing investments that will help ensure every young Canadian has a
healthy start to adulthood and can reach their full potential.
If pressed on the relationship between the new fund and the Bilateral Agreements
Our government is taking a comprehensive approach to ensure that Canadians have the health
care they need in order to lead healthy and productive lives.
We also recognize that in addition to supporting the provinces and territories through the close to
$200 billion in new funding, we too support organizations that work on the front lines in our
communities providing support to our youth.
The new Youth Mental Health Fund builds on existing investments that will help ensure young
Canadians have a healthy start to adulthood and can reach their full potential.
34. Mental Health of Black and Other Racialized Canadians
We recognize the significant and unique challenges faced by Black and other racialized Canadians,
including systemic racism and discrimination and their significant impacts on mental health.
In 2018, the Public Health Agency of Canada launched the Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health
of Black Canadians Fund and to continue this work, Budget 2024 is providing $4 million over the
next two years.
These funds support a variety of community-based projects across Canada to support positive
mental health and address underlying determinants of mental health.
If pressed on mental health investments supporting racialized Canadians
Since 2019, PHAC’S s Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund has been funding community-
based programming for children and caregivers across Canada, notably Racialized communities
facing mental health inequities.
Examples of funded projects include:
a school-based program for newcomers to foster a positive sense of self and belonging
cooking and nutrition programming that emphasizes healthy relationships
arts-based methods that allow for individuals to process trauma and express themselves and their
cultural identity
35. National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Health Canada has worked with the Standards Council of Canada to develop standards and
guidelines for mental health and substance use services.
Our goal is to help ensure services meet an established level of quality and accessibility by
reducing stigma and promoting health equity.
Standards development has been informed by evidence and engagement with hundreds of
stakeholders, including people with lived and living experience.
Standards deliverables are expected to be completed in Spring 2024.
36. Suicide Prevention
Our hearts go out to all loved ones of those we have lost to suicide, and to those who struggle with
suicidal thoughts.
It is essential for Canadians to have timely access to suicide prevention – they need to know they
are not alone; someone is there to help.
People across Canada can now call or text 9-8-8 to have access to 24/7, bilingual, trauma-
informed, and culturally appropriate suicide prevention support.
Building on current evidence and the momentum and collaboration of 9-8-8, our government is also
leading the development of a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan to strengthen Canada’s
collective response to suicide..
The Government of Canada will be releasing the Action Plan in Spring 2024 with the aim of
increasing collaboration with partners, including provinces and territories, Indigenous partners and
suicide prevention stakeholders to advance shared suicide prevention priorities.
37. SOCI Report on the Effectiveness of the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada welcomes the findings of the Senate Committee on Social Affairs,
Science and Technology, and its recommendations on how to improve the Federal Framework for
Suicide Prevention and reduce suicide rates in Canada. The SOCI recommendations have informed
the areas for action in the development of the upcoming National Suicide Prevention Action Plan.
We know that certain populations and communities are disproportionality represented in suicide
rates and that tailored, evidence-based approaches are needed.
We are committed to collaboration and ongoing engagement with all partners, including Indigenous
partners.
38. Timeline for Release
The Government of Canada is committed to developing a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan
that will set the stage for collective action on suicide prevention.
The Action Plan will be evergreen, adopting an iterative approach to enable ongoing, meaningful
engagement, collaboration and a shared commitment to further action with partners.
We are actively working with partners, including provinces and territories to identify shared
priorities, starting with 9-8-8.
The first iteration of the Action Plan is expected to be released in the Spring 2024.
39. Wellness Together Canada (WTC) Transition
During the COVID-19 pandemic, we launched Wellness Together Canada to address an urgent need
for mental health supports.
As this global health crisis has ended, the government has transitioned away from these emergency
supports as of April 3, 2024.
Canadians will still have access to resources, supports, and services at Canada.ca/mental-health.
We are transferring billions of dollars to provinces and territories to support health care, including
mental health care, over the coming years through both an increase of the Canada Health Transfer,
and the new ten-year bilateral agreements – that’s an additional $25 billion.
If pressed
Every Canadian should have access to quality mental health supports when and where they need
it.
Provinces and territories are best placed to support the needs of their communities by integrating
these services into their whole system of care.
We’ll continue to work with the provinces and territories through the bilateral health care
agreements and with partners and stakeholders to ensure people across the country have access
to the support they need to thrive.
CANNABIS, SMOKING & TOBACCO
40. Cannabis
Since 2018, our Government has implemented a robust public health approach to keeping
cannabis out of the hands of youth and ensuring adults have access to a quality-controlled and
regulated supply, while reducing the illicit market.
Since legalization, rates of use among youth have not changed significantly, and more Canadians
who consume cannabis are purchasing from legal retailers.
If pressed on legislative review
Health Canada is pleased to have received the Expert Panel’s final report, and the Government has
tabled the report in
Parliament on March 21, 2024.
Health Canada thanks Mr. Morris Rosenberg and members of the Expert Panel for their
commitment and dedication to leading the evidence-based and inclusive review of the Cannabis
Act.
Health Canada is carefully reviewing and analyzing the report and its recommendations.
The Panel’s findings will help inform Health Canada’s ongoing efforts to improve the operation and
administration of Canada’s cannabis control framework.
If pressed on Review of the Medical Access Regime
The Government actively monitors the medical access program and committed to evaluate the
framework within the legislative review of the Cannabis Act.
The Expert Panel considered the medical access program in their review and made
recommendations related to medical access.
Health Canada is carefully reviewing and analyzing the Expert Panel’s recommendations.
If pressed on complaints regarding personal production with Health Canada authorization
Health Canada continues to take action to strengthen oversight and reduce the risk of abuse of the
program.
Under the Cannabis Regulations, Health Canada may refuse or revoke a registration on public
health or public safety grounds, including the risk of cannabis being diverted to an illicit market or
activity.
As of March 31, 2024, Health Canada has refused or revoked over 3400 registrations under the
Cannabis Regulations, including over 3100 for reasons of public health and public safety.
If pressed on cannabis poisonings among seniors
Health Canada is aware of a recent publication that examined cannabis-related poisonings among
older adults in Ontario.
Health Canada continues to regularly communicate with Canadians about the health risks
associated with cannabis and its use. For example, Health Canada has published resources that
outlines important facts to consider for adults over 55 when deciding whether to use cannabis.
The Department continues to monitor adverse reactions to cannabis among all Canadians,
including seniors, and publishes annual reports on adverse reactions to cannabis on its website.
Canadians using cannabis for medical purposes, especially seniors who may also be taking
medications at the same time, should consult with their healthcare provider prior to using cannabis
on an ongoing basis.
If pressed on paediatric cannabis poisonings
Health Canada is concerned about potential harms to children who accidentally consume
cannabis.
The Department issued a public advisories in December 2021, April 2022 and May 2023. The
advisory includes guidance on how to recognize and react to cannabis poisoning.
In Spring 2023, Health Canada also launched a public education campaign to help prevent
accidental poisonings in children from edible cannabis.
Looking forward, Health Canada continues to educate Canadians on this important issue through
outreach efforts to healthcare providers and educators and will continue to monitor reports of
adverse reactions to cannabis.
If pressed on non-compliant edible cannabis products that exceed the regulatory limit for THC
The Cannabis Act and its regulations were designed first and foremost to protect public health and
public safety.
Health Canada is aware of non-compliance regarding edible cannabis products with
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) quantities that exceed the allowable 10 mg per container limit.
Health Canada is working with regulated parties to ensure that they understand and comply with
the regulatory requirements.
If pressed on illegal cannabis products targeted at youth
The Cannabis Act aims to protect youth from the risks of cannabis, including restricting promotion;
prohibiting products and packaging appealing to youth; and setting THC limits.
Illegal edible cannabis often mimics common snacks and candy, and may contain harmful levels of
contaminants and dangerously high levels of THC.
The Act gives law enforcement tools to crackdown on illegal sales, including those targeting youth.
Health Canada continues to educate Canadians to understand the difference between legal and
illegal cannabis and the health and safety risks.
If pressed on youth-oriented public education campaign
We invested in evidence-based campaigns to educate youth and young adults on risks and harms
of cannabis.
In 2018, Health Canada launched Pursue Your Passion, a campaign that visited high schools and
universities across the country.
The campaign has been updated to be a teacher-led presentation for youth to include information
on the different methods of consumption and effects of cannabis on mental health.
The Department also launched an updated version as a virtual, ambassador-led presentation,
visiting over 500 schools between March 2023 and March 2024.
The Department continues to work on additional efforts to educate youth and young adults on
cannabis, and more broadly, polysubstance use and mental health.
If Pressed on Israel Initiating an Anti-Dumping Investigation on Cannabis for Medical Purposes
Imported from Canada
The import and export of cannabis for medical or scientific purposes is strictly regulated and
limited to states that are party to the UN drug conventions, and that have a legal framework for the
medical or scientific use of cannabis.
Health Canada’s import and export policy is consistent with Canada’s international obligations.
Health Canada strictly limits international trade of cannabis for medical and scientific purposes.
Health Canada supports Global Affairs Canada in their engagement with implicated Canadian
exporters.
41. Smoking and Tobacco Use
Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death in Canada.
Our government is committed to reducing tobacco use in Canada to less than five percent by 2035.
Health Canada continues to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and people who do not smoke
from smoking, and to provide people with information on the health hazards of tobacco use, and
supports for quitting smoking.
Canada recently became the first country to require written health warnings be displayed on
individual cigarettes.
If pressed on help for persons who smoke
Quitting smoking can be difficult. Our Government is committed to providing resources to help.
Our Government launched the Tools for a Smoke-Free Life campaign, which encourages adults
aged 35+ who smoke to learn more about the array of tools and supports that can help them quit
smoking.
People in Canada can also contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists
can help develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their
community, where available. The number and web address for the helpline are displayed on
cigarette packs.
If pressed on youth vaping
Protecting the health and safety of youth is a top priority. We are encouraged to see that vaping
rates among youth have levelled off since 2021, however, they remain too high.
We remain concerned about substance use, including youth vaping, and are taking action.
Regulations prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can be seen
or heard by youth, set a maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products, and require
manufacturers and importers to provide sales and ingredients information to Health Canada.
If pressed on flavours regulations
In Canada, vaping among youth remains high. Health Canada has identified the availability of
various desirable flavours as a major contributing factor to the previously-observed rapid rise in
youth vaping.
On May 16, Health Canada’s Forward Regulatory Plan was updated to include submission of the
regulatory package to restrict flavours in vaping products for final publication in Spring 2024.
Based on our experience with reducing youth use of tobacco, we know that comprehensive
measures, such as regulatory action, public education and health promotion, and enhanced
compliance and enforcement activities can impact youth uptake and use.
Health Canada will continue to support individuals seeking to quit smoking through use of use
authorized nicotine replacement therapies and cessation medications. Vaping products will
continue to be available to adults who smoke.
If pressed on the legislative review
The first review of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act found that the Act appears to be making
progress towards achieving its vaping-related objectives.
It also found more work needs to be done and identified areas for action, such as strengthening
compliance and enforcement.
Public consultations on the second review focused on tobacco, and ended on November 17, 2023.
The department is currently analyzing feedback received.
A final report will be tabled in Parliament in 2024 and will be made available online at that time.
If pressed on tobacco cost recovery
Tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of illness and premature death in Canada.
That is why we proposed in the 2023 Fall Economic Statement to amend the Tobacco and Vaping
Products Act to implement a tobacco cost recovery framework. Amendments proposed in Budget
2024 would enhance the sharing of information about tobacco and vaping products across federal
departments, which will support the cost recovery framework.
This framework will help minimize the cost burden on taxpayers of funding federal tobacco and
vaping activities.
Health Canada will consult broadly on the proposed cost recovery framework before
implementation.
If pressed on tobacco labelling regulations
The Government of Canada is committed to increasing public awareness of the harms of tobacco
use.
To this end, we refreshed warning messages and extended health warnings to all tobacco product
packages, to maintain their effectiveness.
We also require health warnings on individual tobacco products, so it would be impossible to avoid
health warnings. This is important for youth, who often get their first cigarette from a friend or
sibling, and don’t see the warnings on the pack.
If pressed on a smoke-free generation
The Government of Canada is committed to protecting youth from the dangers of tobacco use. We
are pleased to see that smoking rates among Canadian youth are at an all-time low.
We recently consulted Canadians during the second review of the Tobacco and Vaping Products
Act, which focused on tobacco. We received many suggestions, including a smoke free generation
and we are analysing the feedback.
Canada is a global leader on many fronts in tobacco control, such our warnings on packaging. We
engage regularly with international counterparts to learn from each other about new measures
taking place.
42. Budget Proposal on the Tobacco Cost Recovery Framework
We are proposing amendments to the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act to enhance the sharing of
information related to tobacco and vaping products across the federal government.
These amendments will support the administration and enforcement of the Tobacco and Vaping
Products Act, including our commitment to implement a tobacco cost recovery framework if Bill C-
59 is adopted.
Health Canada will work with relevant federal departments and agencies to develop standard
procedures and policies, including for the protection of information, prior to sharing of any
information.
PART B. Key Stats
43. Key Stats
Substance Use Prevalence in Canada
Use of Illegal Drugs (past-year, including heroin, cocaine, etc. obtained from illegal drug market)
General Population: 3% in 2019 (the most recent data available) – Rates are stable since 2017
(CADS, 2019)
Youth: 7% in youth grades 7-12 and 12% in post-secondary students in 2021-22 (CSTADS, 2021-22;
CPADS, 2021-22).
use is higher among transgender, gender diverse and/or questioning students
Use of Pharmaceuticals (including opioid-pain relievers and sedatives) for Non-Therapeutic
Reasons (past- year)
General population: 2% in 2019 (the most recent data available)
this is 4X the rate in 2013 (0.5%) and 2X the rate in 2017 (1%) (CADS, 2019)
Youth: 7% in youth grades 7-12 and 13% among postsecondary students (CSTADS, 2021-22;
CPADS, 2021-22).
Costs of Substance Use and Harms in Canada
(Source: CCSA & CSUCH, Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms, 2023.)
Substance use cost Canada more than $49 billion, and led to over 200 deaths every day in 2020
Opioids alone accounted for $7.1 billion (14.4% of total costs)
This includes healthcare/criminal justice costs, lost productivity and other direct costs
Overdose Deaths and Harms
There were 42,494 apparent opioid toxicity deaths between January 2016 and September 2023
In the first 9 months of 2023 (Jan-June):
There were approx. 22 deaths a day
Fentanyl was involved in 82% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths.
82% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths involved opioids that were only non- pharmaceutical in
origin
Most accidental opioid toxicity deaths occurred in:
men (72%)
people aged 20-59 (88%)
Multiple substance use is a factor:
57% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths involved a stimulant
80% of accidental stimulant toxicity deaths involved an opioid
Impacts on broader health system as well:
The percentage of all opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations that involved fentanyl and its
analogues has increased 100%.
Compared to the two-year period before the pandemic (April 2018 – March 2020, 9,470
hospitalizations) there was a 24 percent increase in opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations in
Canada during the first two years of the pandemic (April 2020 – March 2022, 11,765
hospitalizations).
The percentage of all opioid-related poisoning emergency department visits that involved fentanyl
and its analogues has increased 120% since 2018 when national surveillance began.
Regional Variations
88% of accidental opioid-related deaths occurred in B.C., Alberta and Ontario from January to
September 2023 – although rates were also elevated in Saskatchewan and Yukon.
Comparison to the U.S.
Since 2016, trends in opioid-related deaths have evolved similarly in both countries. However, the
magnitude of the crisis has been greater in the US.
In 2022, there were 22.7 opioid-related deaths per 100,000 population in the US compared to 19.4
opioid-related deaths per 100,000 population in Canada.
There are also similarities in the characteristics of opioid-related deaths in the two countries;
notably, more deaths occurred among males and middle-aged individuals, and fentanyl was
present in a significant proportion of those deaths.
In 2021, nearly 88% of opioid-involved overdose deaths involved synthetic opioids (e.g., fentanyl
and analogues) while in Canada 86% of opioid-involved overdose deaths involved fentanyl and 20%
involved fentanyl analogues (note: due to data limitations, a death involving fentanyl could also
involve a fentanyl analogue).
Indigenous Peoples
Across Canada, Indigenous Peoples are overrepresented in terms of substance-related deaths.
Example: In B.C. from January to June 2023, First Nations people died at 6.0 times the rate of other
B.C. residents.
In the first six months of 2023 (January to June) – First Nations women died from an overdose at
11.9X the rate of non-First Nations women in BC.
Example: In Saskatchewan, in 2023, more than twice as many First Nations females (59) died from
accidental deaths involving opioids than Caucasian females (29).
Example: In Alberta, while First Nations people only make up 6% of the population, they represent
22% of all opioid poisoning deaths from January to June 2020.Example: In Ontario, in 2021, the rate
of opioid-toxicity deaths among First Nations people was seven times higher than the rate for non-
First Nations people.
Substance Use & Women
Between January 2016 and September 2023 – women made up 25-30% of all opioid related deaths,
and 38-50% of opioid-related hospitalizations.
Between September and December 2020, 16.2% of women self-reported an increase in their
alcohol consumption.
2021-22 – 19% of high school female students reported cannabis use
Prescribed Alternatives (Safer Supply) Projects
As of May 1, 2024:
There are 22 federally-funded projects currently active, allof which provide direct service delivery.
Active sites serve approximately 3,116 clients in 3 provinces (B.C., Ontario, and New Brunswick).
QC receives funding that they manage for safer supply projects.
Since 2018, HC has supported 31 projects through SUAP with total funding commitment of over
$127 million
Supervised Consumption Sites (SCS)
There are currently 38 SCS offering services in Canada
Between January 2017 and October 2023 at SCS in Canada:
There were over 4.4 million visits (exact number: 4,480,823)
There were at least 389,000 unique clients (exact number: 389,843)
Over 53,000 overdoses were attended to (exact number: 52,997)
Staff made over 424,000 referrals to health and social services (exact number: 424,305)
Naloxone Training and Distribution
SUAP-funded naloxone projects have resulted in:
the training of more than 2 million Canadians on how to respond to an overdose, including 1.5
million trained on how to administer naloxone
more than 92,000 nasal naloxone kits distributed across Canada (as of May 2023).
Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP)
As on May 2, 2024, $595M was committed for to 389 projects through SUAP since 2017 to address
the overdose crisis, and substance use overall.
Currently, the program is supporting 106 innovative harm reduction, treatment and prevention
projects that meet the needs of disproportionately impacted populations at the community-level.
Through the 2023 Federal Budget, $144 million in new funding for SUAP was announced which will
allow the program to support a new cohort of projects stemming from a Call for Proposals launched
in September 2023.
SUAP provides time-limited funding for a wide range of innovative and evidence-informed projects
including substance use prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across the country.
Projects target a range of substances, including opioids, stimulants, cannabis, alcohol, nicotine
and tobacco, at the community, regional and national levels .The program supports innovative
projects across the country, including the North.
Cumulatively, as of March 31, 2023, SUAP-funded projects have created a total of:
6,619 knowledge products including pamphlets, publications, knowledge hubs, training
curriculums, guidelines, apps, and toolkits;
64,437 learning opportunities including training sessions, conferences, webinars, and communities
of practice; and,
2,860 new services including harm reduction, counselling, treatment, safer supply, and drug
checking.
Active Projects – Breakdown (as of May 4, 2024)
There are currently 106 active SUAP projects across the country, representing $251M in federal
funding. The breakdown of active projects by PT is as follows:
AB: 4 BC: 31 MB: 5 NB: 3 NL: 5 NS: 2 NT: 0 YK: 2 NU: 0 ON: 50 PEI: 0 QC: 2 SK: 2
The Province of Quebec receives SUAP funding on a per-capita basis (approximately 22.5% of SUAP
contribution funding). Funding is administered through contribution agreements with the Ministère
de la Santé et des Services sociaux.
Active SUAP projects that focus on the following pillars:
Harm reduction: 62
Treatment: 30
Prevention: 14
Active SUAP projects include projects that focus on the following priority populations:
Indigenous led and/or focused: 17
Youth-focused: 4
2SLGBTQIA+led and/or -focused: 1
Rural and Remote Communities: 15
Active SUAP projects that target the following substances:
Opioids: 42
Alcohol: 2
Tobacco: 2
Cannabis:5
Methamphetamine: 2
Polysubstance: 53
Declarations of Emergency
Numerous jurisdictions (provinces and territories, municipalities and First Nations) across British
Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick and the Yukon have various
emergency declarations with regards to the overdose crisis, substance use, mental health and/or
homelessness.
P/T Declarations:
British Columbia – Public Health Emergency – April 2016
Alberta – Public Health Crisis – May 2017
Yukon – Call to Action (Substance Use Health Emergency) – January 2022
In 2024 alone, emergency declarations have been made by the City of Belleville, Ontario and
several First Nations communities across BC, Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario.
Federal Funding
General Overview:
Overdose Crisis – since 2017, investments of over $1B (including $359.2M in Budget 2023 and
$150M in Budget 2024)
The Government of Canada will increase PT funding by $200B over 10 years (including $25B for
shared health priorities).
The $25B is on top of 2017 PT bilateral agreements which includes $5B over 10 years for Mental
Health and Addictions services.
Regular Support to PTs via Canada Health Transfers
CHT – $49.4B (an increase of 9.3%) (2023-2024), $52.1B (2024-2025) $11B to QC (2023-2024),
$11.54B (2024-2025)
Bilateral Agreement Funding Included in Working Together Plan
$25B over 10 years (Budget 2023) to support family health services, health workers and backlogs,
mental health and substance use, and a modernized data system through tailored bilateral
agreements.
Approximately one third of federal funding flowed through bilateral agreements is being targeted by
provinces and territories for mental health and substance use initiatives (one of four shared health
care priorities) (note: the funding breakdown for Quebec is not available).
Overall, PTs have adopted an integrated posture with respect to MHSU. It is, therefore, challenging
with currently available information to disaggregate PT funding allocations for mental health from
substance use.
Research Funding:
Over the last five years, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested $90.6
million on opioid research, which includes funding to the Canadian Research Initiative in
Substance Misuse (CRISM), a pan-Canadian research network that seeks to identify and develop
clinical and community-based interventions for substance use disorders.
Other Bilateral Agreement Support:
Emergency Treatment Fund – $150M for 5 years (Budget 2018). The 2018 ETF provided support to
PTs to help address the opioid crisis by enhancing access to treatment.
Mental Health and Substance Use in Canada
50% of people with schizophrenia also have a substance use disorder
50% of those in substance use treatment live with mental illness
many of hospitalizations related to opioid use disorder and opioid overdose include co-diagnosis of
another mental health disorder (56% and 43%, respectively)
Population Mental Health
2022 - 53% of Canadians rated their mental health as “Excellent or very good”, down from 2021
(59%)
Nearly 1 in 5 Canadians reported a need for mental health care in 2020.
45% of those who had a need reported that their needs were either unmet or only partially met.
People with a mental illness are 2X as likely to have a substance use disorder
At least 20% of people with a mental illness having a co-occurring substance use disorder..
Indigenous Mental Health
2021 – only 51% of Indigenous Peoples in Canada reported excellent or very good mental health,
compared to 59% of white Canadians, and 62% of racialized non-Indigenous individuals.
2021 – Over 1 in 4 Indigenous Peoples (27%) reported having an anxiety or mood disorder,
compared to 17% of white individuals, and 6% of racialized non-Indigenous individuals.
2020 – 13% of Indigenous Peoples had unmet needs for mental health care, compared to 8% of
white individuals, and 7% of racialized non-Indigenous individuals.
2019 Stats Canada Report – the suicide rate (2011-2016) among First Nations people (24.3 deaths
per 100,000) was three times higher than the rate among non-Indigenous people (8.0 deaths per
100,000).
Indigenous Peoples represent 39% of shelter users, but comprise 5% of the Canadian population.
Standards for Mental Health & Substance Use (MHSU)
March 2022 - HC partnered with the Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to coordinate the
development of standards and related deliverables.
The 6 priority areas include:
1. Integration of MHSU in Primary Care;
2. Digital MHSU Apps;
3. IYS;
4. Integrated MHSU Services for Complex Needs;
5. Substance Use Treatment Centres – Withdrawal Management; and
6. Substance Use Workforce – Substance Use Health Competencies for Prescribers
Integrated Youth Services (IYS)
Budget 2023 funding through tailored bilateral agreements and ongoing Budget 2017 funding for
mental health and substance use is supporting the expansion of IYS.
As of 2023, there are 91 active IYS sites in Canada, and another 48 under development.
Wellness Together Canada (WTC) Transition Supplemental
Number of Canadians served by WTC
As of March 2024, this investment by the Government of Canada has served over 4.36 million
individuals across all provinces and territories who have accessed the Wellness Together Canada
portal in over 12 million web sessions.
From April 2020 to February 2024, there have been over 207,000 adult counselling sessions, and
there were over 185,000 texting sessions conducted for both youth and adults.
Government of Canada’s continuing support to help connect Canadians with eligible PT resources
The Government of Canada is confident in the capacity of every province and territory to ensure no
Canadian is left behind.
The federal government renewed the canada.ca/mental-health webpage to better serve as a
navigation tool for Canadians to refer them to local resources and access services available from
their respective province or territory.
The page features available resources and links from each of the provinces and territories to help
Canadians find the mental health supports they need when they need them.
For example:
1. Residents of Alberta will find:
211 Alberta: a crisis supports and virtual service, available 24/7
Alberta Mental Health Line: a confidential support, information and referral service staffed by
mental health professionals and available 24/7
Alberta Addiction Health Line: a rapid access counselling service staffed by mental health
professionals and available 24/7
2. Residents of Quebec will find:
Government of Quebec: provincial website with information on mental health and how to find
support.
Info-Social 811: a free confidential telephone consultation service to connect with a psychosocial
worker, available 24/7
Tel-jeunes and parents: a phone, text, and chat counselling for youth 12 to 17 and their parents,
available daily from 8am to 10pm. Some services are available from 6am to 2am.
3. In New Brunswick, residents can find:
1. Government of New Brunswick: Addictions and Mental Health provincial website with
information on mental health and addictions supports and services.
2. Addiction and Mental Health Helpline: a toll-free phone helpline available 24/7
3. Bridge the gApp: an online mental health resource connecting individuals to local services,
information, and tools.
4. 211 New Brunswick: information and referral service for social, community and government
support and services, available 24/7. Online chat is available Monday to Friday, 8am to 10pm
Consultations and Engagement
Mental health experts/advocates Before arriving at a decision, the Government of Canada carefully
considered the changing landscape since the launch of WTC in April 2020: easing of the COVID-19
pandemic; new bilateral funding to the provinces and territories (including for mental health and
substance use); increase in availability of virtually delivered mental health services in provinces
and territories; the availability of resources such as Kids Help Phone, and the launch of the 9-8-8
suicide crisis helpline (launched November 30, 2023).
PART C. Supplemental
44. Main Estimates
2024-25 Main Estimates
Health Canada
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
3,919.0
Increases
4,812.5
Decreases
(333.5)
Net Change
4,479.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
8,398.0
% Change This Year over Last Year
114.3%
(in millions $)
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
181.2
Increases
129.5
Decreases
(30.1)
Net Change
99.4
2024-25 Main Estimates
280.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
54.9%
(in millions $)
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
4,100.2
Increases
4,942.0
Decreases
(363.6)
Net Change
4,578.4
2024-25 Main Estimates
8,678.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
111.7%
Health Canada has a proposed net increase of $4,578.4M in its 2024-25 Main Estimates (from
$4,100.2M in 2023-24 to $8,678.6M in 2024-25).
Increases of $4,941.6M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed TB Submissions increase of $4,813.4M
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians ($2,630.5M)
Dental Care for Canadians and the Interim Canada Dental Benefit ($2,095.0M)
Renewal of the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy ($58.3M)
Strengthening Environmental Protection for a Healthier Canada (support amendments to the
Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999) ($10.1M)
Building a world-class health data system for Canadians ($8.5M)
Canada's National Adaptation Strategy ($7.8M)
Action Plan for Official Languages 2023-2028: Protection-Promotion-Collaboration ($3.2M)
Funding Level Increases [$8.4M]
Terry Fox Research Institute and Ovarian Cancer Canada in support of cancer research ($8.4M)
Other [$119.8M]
Funding for newly signed collective agreements ($106.1M)
Various other increases under $2.0M (totalling $9.4M)
Transfer from the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food for the delivery of the Minor Use
Pesticide Program under the Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership ($4.3M)
Decreases of $233.9M (including Statutory) Sunset [$235.0M]
Improve mental health supports and services (Wellness Together Canada) ($69.9M)
Canada’s Chemicals Management Regime ($61.7M)
Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office ($24.5M)
Strengthening the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process ($17.8M)
Bringing Innovation to Regulations ($13.3M)
National Standards on Mental Health ($12.7M)
Address anti-Indigenous racism in health care ($9.6M)
Construction of plasma collection sites ($9.2M)
Implementation of greening initiatives ($8.3M)
Ensure the ongoing integrity of the Public Service Occupational Health Program ($6.8M)
Funding Level Decrease [$90.4M]
Addressing the Opioid Crisis and Substance Use and Addictions Program (as a result of approved
reprofiles) ($64.3M)
Support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services ($13.5M)
Canada Brain Research Fund Program (as a result of an approved reprofile) ($8.2M)
Renewal of the federal framework for the legalization and regulation of Cannabis in Canada ($4.4M)
Other [$38.9M]
Refocusing Government Spending ($20.7M)
Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plans ($13.7M)
Various other decreases under $2.0M ($4.5M)
Statutory Appropriations - Net funding increase of $99.4M relates mainly to the Canada Dental
Benefit Plan and employee benefits plan adjustments.
For information purposes, the 2024-25 Main Estimates total statutory includes the new Canadian
Dental Benefit Plan of $100.2M and a statutory revenue forecast of $51.5M for the internal shared
services partnership between Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada which is in
line with the previous year.
Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
HC
CONTRIBUTIONS
Substance Use and Addictions Program
Purpose /Objectives
The Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides funding for a wide range of evidence-
informed and innovative substance use prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across
Canada at the community, regional and national levels. These public education, capacity building,
research, best practices/standards and service delivery initiatives target a range of substances,
including opioids, stimulants, cannabis, alcohol, tobacco and vaping products.
Expected Results
Health Canada provides contribution funding through SUAP in support of the Canadian Drug and
Substance Strategy, as well as the delivery of 3 of the Department’s Programs: Tobacco Control,
Controlled Substances, and Cannabis.
In addition to funding many community, regional and national organizations, Health Canada also
provides approximately $10 million SUAP funding annually to the Canadian Centre on Substance
Use and Addiction to achieve national impact through partnerships, and for knowledge
mobilization, capacity building and training for targeted groups/populations in the areas of stigma
reduction, workforce competencies, alcohol, cannabis, and the intersections between substance
use and mental health.
It is expected that through these investments, Canadians and stakeholders will have access to
evidence- based information on substance use and increased availability of harm reduction and
treatment services. In the longer- term, this will lead to improved knowledge and skills and will help
Canadians make informed decisions about their health to reduce risk-taking behavior. These
investments may contribute to reduced negative health impacts experienced by people who use
drugs.
2022–23 Expenditures
145,289,504
2023–24 Main Estimates
136,634,149
2024–25 Main Estimates
104,300,573
Mental Health Commission of Canada Contribution Program
Purpose /Objectives
The Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC), an arm's length, not- for-profit organization,
was established in March 2007 with a 10-year mandate to improve health and social outcomes for
people and their families living with mental illness. Between 2007 and 2017, the Government of
Canada invested $130 million in the MHCC through a grant, to develop a mental health strategy for
Canada, conduct an anti- stigma campaign, and create a knowledge exchange centre. In 2016, the
MHCC's mandate was renewed for a 10-year period, from 2017-18 to 2026-27, to advance work on
mental health priorities in 4 areas: the integration of mental health and substance use (in
collaboration with the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addictions), suicide prevention,
priority populations, and engagement with diverse stakeholders.
Expected Results
The MHCC is expected to contribute to the improved mental health and well-being of Canadians,
notably in the areas of suicide prevention, stigma reduction, population- based initiatives, and
mental health and substance use integration. This will be done through developing and
disseminating knowledge products, establishing collaborative partnerships, and providing
evidence-based trainings. A variety of learning materials (online modules, training, videos, etc.) will
be targeted for children and youth, older adults, Indigenous communities, and underserved and
marginalized populations. In addition, the MHCC will further support the implementation of the
National Standard for Psychological Health and Safety in the Workplace and the National Standard
for Mental Health and Well-Being of Post-Secondary Students.
2022–23 Expenditures
14,250,000
2023–24 Main Estimates
14,250,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
14,250,000
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENTS
Contributions to Provinces and Territories for Shared Health Priorities
Purpose /Objectives
Through new investments outlined in Budget 2023 associated with the Working Together to Improve
Health Care for Canadians Plan, this Program was expanded to support provinces and territories in
addressing the following shared health priorities:
Expanding access to family health services, including in rural and remote areas.
Supporting health workers and reducing backlogs for health services such as surgeries and
diagnostics.
Improving access to quality mental health, substance use, and addictions services.
Modernizing the health care system with standardized information and digital tools so health care
providers and patients have access to electronic health information.
Helping Canadians age with dignity, closer to home, by supporting efforts to improve access to
home and community care, and safe long-term care.
The Plan includes $25 billion over 10 years (2023-24 to 2032-33) in bilateral funding to support the
first 4 shared health priorities, which will be transferred to provinces and territories through the
Working Together agreements. These agreements also include the remaining $2.4 billion of $5
billion from Budget 2017 to improve access to mental health and addictions services by supporting
one or more of the areas of action outlined in the August 2017 Common Statement of Principles on
Shared Health Priorities.
Health Canada will also provide provinces and territories with $3 billion over 5 years through Aging
with Dignity agreements to support them in helping Canadians age with dignity close to home.
Provinces and territories will:
Apply standards of care in long-term care facilities.
Help support workforce stability, including wage top-ups and improvements to workplace
conditions.
The Aging with Dignity agreements also include the remaining $2.4 billion from the Budget 2017
commitment of $6 billion over 10 years to advance the priorities associated with home and
community care in the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
Expected Results
It is expected that through these investments, Canadians will experience tangible improvements in
access to high- quality family health services (i.e., family doctor, or nurse practitioner); timely,
equitable, and high-quality mental health and substance use services, with a focus on youth;
interoperable digital tools and data; home and community care, and palliative care services.
Canadians will also receive improved long-term care by ensuring consistent standards are applied,
strengthening enforcement and oversight, and supporting initiatives to enhance workforce stability.
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
-
2024–25 Main Estimates
4,300,310,000
Health Canada’s Main Estimates Summary
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians
Description
Funding to Support the four shared health priorities: Renew the Territorial Health Investment Fund
in recognition of medical travel and the additional cost of delivering health care in the territories;
support work with provinces and territories to develop new health data indicators; and, advance
digital health tools and an interoperability roadmap. (+$2,630.5M)
$2,630.5M received in-year (SEA) in 2023-24
Mental Health is contained in two of the four pillars of this item
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
2,630.5
Net Change (in millions)
2,630.5
Renewal of the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy
Description
Funding to improve access to community-based substance use services and supports; amend
legislation and create new regulations to streamline approvals for harm reduction services; support
data collection and analysis; and target enforcement efforts to disrupt the toxic illegal drug supply.
(+$58.3M)
$31.7M received in-year (SEB) in 2023-24
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
58.3
Net Change (in millions)
58.3
Sunset - Decreases
Improve mental health supports and services (Wellness Together Canada)
Description
Funding in 2023-24 to sustain improved access to mental health services with the Wellness
Together Canada portal, as well as to help Canadians who are experiencing mental health or
substance use issues.
This item sunsets in 2023-24 and has not been renewed for 2024-25
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
69.9
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
Net Change (in millions)
(69.9)
National Standards on Mental Health
Description
Funding of $12.7M was reprofiled from 2021-22 to 2023-24 so that contractual work being done by
the Standards Council of Canada can continue in 2023-24. Initial standards deliverables will be
complete in March 2023 in order to proceed to the next phase of testing.
This item sunsets in 2023-24 and has not been renewed for 2024-25
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
12.7
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
Net Change (in millions)
(12.7)
Funding Level Decreases
Addressing the Opioid Crisis and Substance Use and Addictions Program (as a result of approved
reprofiles)
Description
Overall net funding level decrease due to the following:
Sunset for Budget 2021 Addressing the opioids crisis and problematic substance use (-$32.2M)
Sunset for Budget 2019 The Drug Overdose Crisis in Canada (-$17.0M)
Sunset for the 2020 FES Addressing the opioids crisis (-$8.3M)
Decrease for Budget 2022 Addressing the opioids crisis and problematic substance use (-$6.4M)
Decrease for the Substance Use and Addictions Program reprofile (-$0.3M)
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
105.7
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
41.4
Net Change (in millions)
(64.3)
2024-25 Main Estimates
Public Health Agency of Canada
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
4,157.7
Increases
655.5
Decreases
-3,013.1
Net Change
-2,357.6
2024-25 Main Estimates
1,800.1
% Change This Year over Last Year
(43%)
(in millions $)
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
59.1
Increases
33.9
Decreases
-24.6
Net Change
9.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
68.4
% Change This Year over Last Year
116%
(in millions $)
2023-24 Main Estimates
Total Budgetary
Increases
4,216.8
Decreases
689.4
Net Change
-3,037.7
2024-25 Main Estimates
-2,348.3
% Change This Year over Last Year
1,868.5
Note: Figures may not add up due to rounding.
Public Health Agency of Canada has a proposed total net decrease of $2,348.3M in its 2024-25
Main Estimates (from $4,216.8M in 2023-24 to $1,868.5M in 2024-25). However, please note,
although the table above speaks to the total variances in the Agency’s Main Estimates, the items
listed below specifically pertain to mental health funding.
Increase of $50.3M (excluding Statutory)
Funding to support Canada’s three-digit suicide prevention and emotional distress line ($50.3M);
and
Decrease of $76.9M (excluding Statutory)
Funding for mental health of those affected by COVID-19 (-$76.9M).
Summary of Transfer Payment Program Variances related to Mental Health Funding
PHAC
Grants
Grants to individuals and organizations in support of health promotion projects in the areas of
building community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and
partnership building/intersectoral collaboration
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial assistance provided through grants that support the
Public Health Agency of Canada's (PHAC) interest in promoting population health and disease and
injury prevention.
The goal of Promotion of Population Health Grants is to increase the capacity of individuals and
communities to maintain and improve their health.
Explanation of Variances relating to Mental Health Items
($22M) decrease in funding for distress centres due to sunset in 23-24
The purpose of this funding was to support the ongoing surge in demand faced by distress centres,
at the same time that the sector is experiencing challenges in recruiting and retaining responders.
The distress centres support the needs of those experiencing mental health crisis and distress.
($11M) decrease in funding for mental health of those affected by COVID-19 due to sunset in 23-24
This funding was to support enhanced programming to address the mental health needs of
populations most affected by the pandemic, including youth, older adults, First Nations, Inuit,
Métis, Black and other racialized populations, health care workers and essential service providers.
2022-23 Expenditures
390,416
2023-24 Main Estimates
33,000,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
0
Main Estimates Variance
(33,000,000)
Contributions
Contributions to individuals and organizations to support health promotion projects in the areas of
building community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and
partnership building/intersectoral collaboration
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial assistance provided through contributions that
support the Public Health Agency of Canada's (PHAC) interest in promoting population health and
disease and injury prevention.
The goal of Promotion of Population Health Contributions is to increase the capacity of individuals
and communities to maintain and improve their health.
Explanation of Variances relating to Mental Health Items
$50.3M in new funding for the 9-8-8 suicide prevention line will be received in 24-25
This 3-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress will provide Canadians with safe,
high quality, equitable, accessible and evidence-based crisis support, 24/7/365.
($43.0M) decrease in funding for mental health of those affected by COVID-19 in 24-25
This funding supports enhanced programming to address the mental health needs of populations
most affected by the pandemic, including youth, older adults, Inuit, Metis, Black and other
racialized populations, healthcare workers and essential service providers.
2022-23 Expenditures
92,048,468
2023-24 Main Estimates
47,953,043
2024-25 Main Estimates
55,300,000
Main Estimates Variance
7,346,957
Note: Items not related to mental health for these G&C classes are not included in this table
Public Health Agency of Canada’s Main Estimates Overview
Increase – Mental Health
Initiative
Funding for 9-8-8 suicide prevention
Description
Budget 2023 announced funding of $143.4M over three years to support the operations of the 9-8-8
line for suicide prevention and emotional distress which would provide Canadians with safe, high
quality, equitable, accessible and evidence-based crisis support, 24/7/365, through call or text, in
English and French.
PHAC will administer 9-8-8 funding through a contribution agreement with Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, which will build capacity by supporting the onboarding of new independent crisis
lines to the 9-8-8 responder network.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
50.3
Net Change (in millions)
50.3
Decrease – Mental Health
Initiative
Funding to improve mental health supports and services to help those most affected by COVID-19
and distress centres
Description
Budget 2021 announced funding to address the mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This funding includes $100 million over three years for mental health promotion and mental illness
prevention for those most affected, and $50 million over two years to address PTSD and trauma in
frontline and essential workers and others who are disproportionately affected.
It also includes $3 million over two years to develop indicators to monitor the impact of national
mental health service standards and set up data collection and data infrastructure for standards
reporting.
Part of the funding is also to help to stabilize distress centres during the pandemic and pandemic
recovery phase as they continue to experience a surge in demand for mental health crisis calls.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
81.9
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.0
Net Change (in millions)
(76.9)
Please Note: values exclude statutory
2024-25 Main Estimates
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
691.4
Increases
85.0
Decreases
66.7
Net Change
18.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
709.7
% Change This Year over Last Year
2.6%
(in millions $)
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
150.7
Increases
12.7
Decreases
16.8
Net Change
(4.1)
2024-25 Main Estimates
146.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
(2.7%)
(in millions $)
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
842.1
Increases
97.7
Decreases
83.5
Net Change
14.2
2024-25 Main Estimates
856.3
% Change This Year over Last Year
1.7%
Note: Figures may not add due to rounding.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency has a proposed net increase of $14.2M in its 2024-25 Main
Estimates (from $842.1M in 2023-24 to $856.3M in 2024-25).
Increases of $97.7M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed Treasury Board Submissions [$50.2M]
Funding for the renewal of the Daily Shift Inspection Presence program ($15.6M)
Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures ($14.2M)
Funding to establish a foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) vaccine bank for Canada, and to develop
FMD response plans ($11.4M)
Funding to secure market access for the Canadian agricultural sector ($5.8M)
Funding to implement Canadaʼs Indo-Pacific Strategy ($3.2M)
Funding Level Increases [$1.6M]
Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade of regulated
animals other than livestock ($1.4M)
Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and Drug
Regulations ($0.2M)
Other [$45.9M]
Funding for Collective Bargaining ($40.7M)
Transfer from the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to deliver initiatives related to market
access under the Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership ($5.2M)
Decreases of $83.5M (including Statutory) Funding Level Decreases [$61.8M]
Funding to maintain programming which mitigates the public health, animal health and economic
risks related to Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy ($35.3M)
Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia ($9.6M)
Funding to address the current Potato Wart crisis in Prince Edward Island ($5.7M)
Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant, and animal products ($5.2M)
Funding for building a post pandemic agile workforce and to support long-term digital
transformation ($4.0M)
Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine fever
($1.9M)
Funding of the Innovative Solution Canada Grant Reprofile (from 2021-22) ($0.1M)
Other [$21.7M]
Refocusing Government Spending ($12.4M)
Employee Benefit Plan (EBP) adjustments ($7.9M)
Transfer to Global Affairs Canada for staff on missions abroad ($0.6M)
Transfer to Health Canada for Improving Food Safety ($0.6M)
Transfer to Treasury Board Secretariat for the Organizational Project Management Capacity
Assessment and Project Complexity and Risk Assessment ($0.2M)
Statutory Appropriations
A net funding decrease of $4.1M in Statutory authorities mainly relates to EBP adjustments.
For information purposes, Statutory authorities included in the 2024-25 Main Estimates consists of
Statutory revenue of $53.0M, Statutory compensation payments of $12.5M, and EBP of $81.1M.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment
Programs
GRANTS
Innovative Solutions Canada (ISC)
Purpose /Objectives
The ISC program supports the generation of new and unique intellectual property (IP) stimulation of
Research and Development collaborations, and growth of small businesses in the Canadian
innovation ecosystem.
Expected Results
CFIA's Innovative Solutions Canada grants will promote the development of innovative approaches
to improve sector outcomes.
2022–23 Expenditures
850,000
2023–24 Main Estimates
400,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
1,049,999
Original amount: 284,167
Plus transfer from Operating to Grants in 2024-25:765,832
CONTRIBUTIONS
Federal Assistance Program (FAP) The FAP supports projects and initiatives that advance CFIA's
strategic outcome of a safe and accessible food supply and plant and animal resource base.
The expected results include:
a. scientific and technical knowledge is advanced and/or enhanced;
b. individual knowledge and skills are developed and/or improved;
c. international collaborations are expanded and/or strengthened; and
d. organizations or initiatives are established or sustained. 568,541 600,000
600,000
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENTS
Compensation Payments
Purpose /Objectives
Compensate Canadians, in accordance with the appropriate regulations, for plants or animals
ordered destroyed for the purpose of disease control.
Expected Results
In accordance with the Health of Animals Act and the Plant Protection Act, owners and/or
producers will be compensated for ordered destruction of animals or plants for the purpose of
disease control. Compensation will be provided according to the market value of the animals or
plants.
2022–23 Expenditures
119,382,097
2023–24 Main Estimates
12,500,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
12,500,000
Canadian Food Inspection Agency Main Estimates Summary
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Funding for the renewal of the Daily Shift Inspection Presence program
Description
The CFIA received Treasury Board (TB) approval for $15.6M in ongoing funding, beginning in 2023-
24, to maintain the Daily Shift Inspection Presence Program in all federal meat processing
establishments identified in a licence and delivered under the Safe Food for Canadians Act (SFC
licence), to meet the United States inspection frequency requirement to maintain market access.
This funding will allow the Agency to continue to provide the presence of an inspector once every 12
hours of operation in all federal meat processing establishments, as well as provide continuous
export opportunities for all establishments, while avoiding the creation of a two-tiered meat
inspection system in Canada.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
15.6
Net Change
15.6
Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for $31.4M in funding over two years (2023-24 to 2024-25), including
$14.2M in 2024-25, to ensure food safety through the continuation of risk-based compliance
verification of domestic and import food sectors in three key areas of work: improving risk
intelligence and oversight, offshore preventative activities, and improving stakeholder compliance.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
14.2
Net Change
14.2
Funding to establish a foot-and- mouth disease (FMD) vaccine bank for Canada, and to develop
FMD response plans
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for $57.5M in funding over five years, starting in 2023-24, with $5.6M
ongoing, to establish an FMD vaccine bank for Canada and to develop FMD response plans. The
Canadian FMD vaccine bank will serve as a strategic reserve of FMD vaccine antigen concentrate to
enable emergency vaccination in response to large FMD outbreaks affecting susceptible species of
Canada’s livestock industry (i.e. cloven-hoofed animals). The Government will also seek a cost-
sharing arrangement with provinces and territories.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
11.4
Net Change
11.4
Funding to secure market access for the Canadian agricultural sector
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for $12.5M in funding over two years (2023-24 to 2024-25), including
$5.8M in 2024-25, for securing market access for the agricultural sector. The overall objective is to
enable the CFIA to continue to maintain and expand market access for Canadian agriculture, agri-
food, seafood, and forestry products exported to global markets and facilitate the importation of
products into Canada.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
5.8
Net Change
5.8
Funding to implement Canadaʼs Indo- Pacific Strategy
Description
Global Affairs Canada (the Strategy lead), along with partner departments and agencies, received
access to new funding earmarked in the fiscal framework, starting in 2023-24, to implement
Canada’s Indo-Pacific Strategy. An off-cycle funding decision provided $2.26B over five years
(starting in FY 2023-24) and $175.4M per year ongoing in support of five objectives that will aim to:
1) promote peace, resilience, and security; 2) expand trade, investment, and supply chain
resilience; 3) invest and connect in people; 4) build a sustainable and green future; and 5) ensure
Canada’s role as an active and engaged partner to the region.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
3.2
Net Change
3.2
Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade of regulated
animals other than livestock
Description
The CFIA received TB approval to access $20.5M over four years (2022-23 to 2025-26) to enable the
Agency to effectively respond to the increasing and significant health risks posed by the growth of
legal and illegal pet trade.
2023-24 Main Estimates
4.2
2024-25 Main Estimates
5.6
Net Change
1.4
Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and Drug
Regulations
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for funding of $10.0M over nine years and $300K ongoing, as
approved in Budget 2022, to support implementation of compliance and enforcement of new
amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations, also known as the Front of Package amendments,
which include other amendments on vitamin D fortification, labelling for aspartame, and
prohibition of partially hydrogenated oils. These regulations came into effect in July 2022 with a
transition period ending on December 31, 2025. Funding will be used to develop compliance
promotion and enforcement strategies, prepare guidance for industry, and training for inspectors.
Ongoing funding will support long-term compliance and enforcement activities, including response
to complaints and inspections.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.8
2024-25 Main Estimates
1.0
Net Change
0.2
Other - Increases
Funding for Collective Bargaining
Description
A total increase of $40.7M in 2024-25 related to collective agreement funding to be received by the
Agency.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
40.7
Net Change
40.7
Transfer from the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to deliver initiatives related to market
access under the Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership
Description
Transfer from Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC) to the CFIA for the Sustainable Canadian
Agricultural Partnership initiative. The Sustainable Agricultural Partnership initiative is a five-year,
$3.5B investment by federal, provincial, and territorial governments aimed at strengthening the
agriculture, agri-food, and agri-based products sector. The objective of the CFIA’s market access
work through this funding is to ensure the Agency is able to conduct its critical functions associated
with administering and enforcing legislation related to the import and export of food, animal, and
plant products.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
5.2
Net Change
5.2
Funding Level Decreases
Funding to maintain programming which mitigates the public health, animal health and economic
risks related to Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE)
Description
BSE programming was first implemented in 2003. As announced in Budget 2019, the program was
renewed as a sunsetter for five years with funding of $35.3M per year from 2019-20 to 2023-24
allocated to the CFIA, and about $2M per year to Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of
Canada.
2023-24 Main Estimates
35.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
0.0
Net Change
(35.3)
Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia
Description
As part of the federal government’s commitment to establishing and maintaining modern federal
science infrastructure, Budget 2017 committed $80.0M over five years (2019-20 to 2024-25) to
replace the Sidney Centre for Plant Health with a new, world class plant health research facility to
help support the safety of Canada’s agriculture and agri-food sector while facilitating trade and
economic growth that benefits Canadians. The new, world-class Centre for Plant Health will
support the science outcomes detailed in the Federal Science and Technology Infrastructure
Initiative (FSTII), help to set the stage for portfolio management of scientific assets and
infrastructure, and implement IM/IT solutions to support federal scientists in their important work.
2023-24 Main Estimates
29.7
2024-25 Main Estimates
20.1
Net Change
(9.6)
Funding to address the current potato wart crisis in Prince Edward Island
Description
The CFIA received a total of $11.3M in funding over two years ($5.7M in 2022-23 and $5.6M in 2023-
24) to address the current potato wart crisis in Prince Edward Island (PEI), develop operational
capacity, respond to international market pressures, and establish a science-based approach that
will minimize further long-term spread within and outside PEI, and protect market access.
2023-24 Main Estimates
5.7
2024-25 Main Estimates
0.0
Net Change
(5.7)
Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant, and animal products
Description
Budget 2019 announced funding of $25.1M over 5 years ($2.4M in 2019-20, $5.7M in 2020-21,
$6.3M in 2021-22, $5.5M in 2022-23, and $5.2M in 2023-24) for the CFIA to continue digitizing its
export certification activities. This is in line with the Government’s commitment to providing
Canadians with reliable, accessible, and secure services that are seamless and digitally enabled.
Through this proposal, the CFIA aimed to advance the replacement of its paper-based system for
issuing export certificates with digital tools to allow Canadian exporters to apply for and receive
certificates online. This funding enabled the CFIA to further digitize transactions with its regulated
parties and foreign competent authorities through the Digital Service Delivery Platform.
2023-24 Main Estimates
5.2
2024-25 Main Estimates
0.0
Net Change
(5.2)
Funding for building a post pandemic agile workforce and to support long- term digital
transformation
Description
The CFIA has received funding of $61.7M over three years (2022-23 to 2024-25), as approved in
Budget 2022, to prepare for the post-pandemic operating environment. Its aim is to help build an
agile workforce and support longer-term digital transformation by: 1) upskilling inspectors on
essential training that was previously unavailable to them due to COVID-19 restrictions; 2)
addressing deferred maintenance for digital services; and 3) examining opportunities for virtual
inspection.
2023-24 Main Estimates
21.9
2024-25 Main Estimates
17.9
Net Change
(4.0)
Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine fever
Description
AAFC, the CFIA, and the Canadian Border Services Agency have received funding of $45.3M over
three years (2022-23 to 2024-25) to support near-term actions for the prevention, preparedness,
and anticipatory trade continuity response initiatives to prevent the entry of African swine fever into
Canada. The CFIA total ask over the duration of the funding proposal is $18.9M.
2023-24 Main Estimates
7.7
2024-25 Main Estimates
5.8
Net Change
(1.9)
Funding of the Innovative Solution Canada (ISC) Grant Reprofile (from 2021-22)
Description
CFIA received grant authority under the ISC grant program Terms and Conditions along with 19
other federal organizations to support small business innovations through posting online
challenges.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.4
2024-25 Main Estimates
0.3 (excludes transfer in 2024-25 of 0.8 from Operating to Grants)
Net Change
(0.1)
Other - Decreases
Refocusing Government Spending
Description
In Budget 2022, the Government announced the launch of a comprehensive Strategic Policy Review
with the objective of generating savings of $6.0B from 2024-25 to 2026-27 and $3.0B annually by
2026-27. Budget 2023 augments these commitments to achieve ongoing savings of $4.5B annually
by 2026-27. Budget 2023 announced a reduction of $500M to organizations’ travel budgets and
spending on professional services starting in 2023-24, and ongoing savings of $1.7B annually by
2024-25. The CFIA will reduce spending by $12.4M in 2024-25, $18.3M in 2025-26, and $26.5M in
2026-27 and ongoing.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(12.4)
Net Change
(12.4)
Employee Benefit Plan (EBP) adjustments
Description
The Annual Reference Level Update Employee Benefit Plan rate was decreased by 1.4%.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(7.9)
Net Change
(7.9)
Transfer to Global Affairs Canada for staff on missions abroad
Description
Transfer to Global Affairs Canada from the CFIA in the amount of $0.6M to adjust funding previously
provided for departmental staff located at missions abroad. The transfer will be on an ongoing
basis.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(0.6)
Net Change
(0.6)
Transfer to Health Canada for Improving Food Safety
Description
Transfer from the CFIA to the Department of Health in the amount of $0.6M for ensuring food safety
through the continuation of risk-based compliance verification of domestic and import food
sectors.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(0.6)
Net Change
(0.6)
Transfer to Treasury Board Secretariat for the Organizational Project Management Capacity
Assessment (OPMCA) and Project Complexity and Risk Assessment (PCRA)
Description
Transfer from the CFIA to Treasury Board Secretariat in the amount of $0.2M for the OPMCA and
PCRA. Testing and feedback from departments demonstrated that the renewed tools were
expected to increase management utility by providing clearer information on organizational
strengths and potential areas for improvement, and by more effectively integrating OPMCA and
PCRA results to better inform project risk management planning and oversight.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(0.2)
Net Change
(0.2)
2024-25 Main Estimates
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
1,342.8
Increases
43.2
Decreases
(25.2)
Net Change
18.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
1,360.8
% Change This Year over Last Year
1.3%
(in millions $)
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
8.9
Increases
0.0
Decreases
(0.1)
Net Change
(0.1)
2024-25 Main Estimates
8.8
% Change This Year over Last Year
(1.1%)
(in millions $)
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
1,351.7
Increases
43.2
Decreases
(25.3)
Net Change
17.9
2024-25 Main Estimates
1,369.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
CIHR has a proposed net increase of $17.9M in its 2024-25 Main Estimates (from $1,351.7M in
2023-24 to $1,369.6M in 2024-25).
Increases of $43.2M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed TB Submissions increase [ $17.2M]
Funding for building a World-Class Health Data System for Canadians ($9.9M)
Funding for the Canada Excellence Research Chairs ($7.3M)
Funding Level Increases [$16.2M]
Funding for the Canada First Research Excellence Fund ($11.2M)
Funding to reflect the distribution of the Canada Graduate Scholarships ($2.8M)
Funding to learn more about Dementia and Brain Health in Aging ($2.2M)
Other [$9.8M]
Funding for compensation adjustments resulting from collective agreements ($6.4M)
Funding to gather national data on trends in drug use and harms in Canada ($1.5M)
Non-material variances under $1.5M, resulting in a net increase ($1.9M)
Decreases of $25.2M (including Statutory) Sunset [$19.1M]
Funding for Pediatric Cancer Research ($14.6M)
Funding for Cervical Cancer in Canada ($2.1M)
Funding to address the Opioid crisis ($2.4M)
Other [$6.1M]
Reprofiling of the Clinical Trials Fund ($4.7M)
Refocusing government spending to deliver for Canadians ($1.4M)
Statutory Appropriations - Net funding decrease of $0.1M relates mainly to employee benefits plan
adjustments.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
CIHR
“GRANTS FOR RESEARCH PROJECTS AND PERSONNEL SUPPORT” TRANSFER PAYMENT PROGRAM
World-Class Health Data System for Canadians
Purpose /Objectives
This funding will allow national health data partners to work together to advance a national vision
for a world-class health data system.
$9.9 million in 2024-25, $5.4 million in 2025-26, $5.3 million in 2026- 27 and $5.7 million in 2027-
28.
Expected Results
Disaggregated data needed to report on the number of youth in Canada with access to Integrated
Youth Services for mental health and substance use will be harmonized and standardized to
support further research, knowledge mobilization and decision making.
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
-
2024–25 Main Estimates
8,800,140
To learn more about Dementia and Brain Health
Purpose /Objectives
As announced in Budget 2022, this new funding ($20 million from 2022-23 to 2026-27) will be used
to ramp up efforts to learn more about dementia and brain health, to improve treatment and
outcomes for persons living with dementia, and to evaluate and address mental health
consequences for caregivers and different models of care.
$1.4 million in 2022-23 (provided through Supps C), $3.1 million in 2023-24, $5.3 million in 2024-25,
$5.3 million in 2025-26 and $4.5 million in 2026-27.
Expected Results
Research related to dementia and brain health is increased, improve outcomes for persons living
with dementia and their caregivers.
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
2,480,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
4,650,000
Funding to gather national data on trends in drug use and harms in Canada
Purpose /Objectives
Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) will support a Canada-wide study
on controlled substances that will generate baseline data for substance use on the current
situation relating to controlled substance use in Canada and signal emerging threats.
Total funding transfer from Health Canada to CIHR amounts to $6M over four fiscal years (2024-25
to 2027-28).
Expected Results
Population estimates of the use of controlled substances and related knowledge of trends in
Canada are generated, and knowledge is shared
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
-
2024–25 Main Estimates
1,500,000
Pediatric Cancer Research
Purpose /Objectives
This funding is from Budget 2021, which allocated $30M over three years to fund pediatric cancer
research leading to the development of new scientifically proven treatments and cures that can
lead to better outcomes and healthier lives for young patients.
This items sunsets in 2023-24.
Expected Results
Advancements in pediatric cancer research are made that can lead to better outcomes and
healthier lives for young patients.
2022–23 Expenditures
15,702,625
2023–24 Main Estimates
14,087,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
-
Cervical Cancer in Canada
Purpose /Objectives
Funding of $10M was provided over five years, to support research on Human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccination and screening methods to contribute to a reduction of cervical cancer in Canada.
This item sunsets 2023-24.
Expected Results
Contribute to the reduction of cervical cancer in Canada by supporting research on Human
papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination.
2022–23 Expenditures
2,048,605
2023–24 Main Estimates
2,050,169
2024–25 Main Estimates
-
To address the Opioid crisis
Purpose /Objectives
Funding was provided to support research to consolidate and analyze the results of pilot projects
that offer safer alternatives to the illegal supply and their impact on the communities within which
they operate, and increase the evidence base on methamphetamine treatment guidelines and
advance priority research.
This item sunsets in 2023-24, though supplementary funds ($225K) have been transferred from HC
to CIHR in 2024-25.
Expected Results
Pilot projects that offer safer alternatives to the illegal supply and their impact on the communities
within which they operate are analyzed.
Evidence is generated on methamphetamine treatment guidelines.
2022–23 Expenditures
1,845,626
2023–24 Main Estimates
2,300,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
-
Reprofiling of the Clinical Trials Fund
Purpose /Objectives
Funding level decrease due to the re-profile of funds from 2023-24 and 2024-25 to 2025-26 ad
2026-27 to support the final competition for clinical trials projects.
Expected Results
An array of clinical trials phases, designs, and objectives across a broad range of health research
areas, aligning with the priorities of the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy,are supported.
2022–23 Expenditures
65,878,656
2023–24 Main Estimates
74,790,826
2024–25 Main Estimates
71,114,308
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENT PROGRAMS
Canada Excellence Research Chairs Program
Purpose /Objectives
The CERC is a Tri-agency program that is administered by the Tri-agency Institutional Programs
Secretariat, which is housed within the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council and
represents and coordinates the interests of the three federal granting agencies.
This funding, announced in Budget 2022, will support new recruited Chairs in the fields of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics—reinforcing Canada’s competitive advantage as a
destination of choice for world-class researchers.
$78.5 million over 8 fiscal years, starting in 2023-24 ($5.8 million received through SEA). An
additional $2.7 million was transferred from the other councils to CIHR over 7 fiscal years, starting
in 2024- 25, recalibrate the authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based
proportionately on the research areas addressed by the successful applications.
Expected Results
New recruited Chairs in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics are
supported.
Canada’s competitive advantage as a destination of choice for world-class researchers is
reinforced.
2022–23 Expenditures
4,200,000
2023–24 Main Estimates
5,800,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
13,137,901
Canada Graduate Scholarships
Purpose /Objectives
The CGS program provides special recognition and financial support to students who are pursuing
masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada.
The increase is mainly the result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate
Scholarships allocations within the program, between the three granting agencies, to re-align with
the research landscape.
Expected Results
Students who are pursuing masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada are
recognized and supported financially.
Re-align the allocation of funding amongst the three granting agencies with the research landscape.
2022–23 Expenditures
36,226,076
2023–24 Main Estimates
39,047,500
2024–25 Main Estimates
41,847,500
Canada First Research Excellence Fund
Purpose /Objectives
The key objective of the CFREF is to help competitively selected Canadian postsecondary
institutions turn their key strengths into world-leading capabilities.
The Tri-Agency Steering Committee approved the results and integrity of the review process for the
third CFREF competition in February 2023. The purpose of this transfer is to recalibrate the
authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based proportionately on the research areas
addressed by the successful applications. For CIHR, this represents an additional $64.8M over 6
years starting in 2024-25.
Expected Results
Key strengths of Canadian postsecondary institutions turn into world-leading capabilities.
Authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR are based proportionately on the research
areas addressed by the successful applications.
2022–23 Expenditures
38,748,944
2023–24 Main Estimates
47,227,134
2024–25 Main Estimates
58,407,137
Canadian Institutes of Health Research Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Building a World-Class Health Data System for Canadians
Description
Funding for Health Canada, Statistics Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, and the
Canadian Institute for Health Information ($194 million over five years, including $26.4 million to
CIHR), for national health data partners to work together to advance a national vision for a world-
class health data system.
$9.9 million in 2024-25, $5.4 million in 2025-26, $5.3 million in 2026-27 and $5.7 million in 2027-28.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
9.9
Net Change (in millions)
9.9
Canada Excellence Research Chairs (CERC)
Description
Funding to support new Chairs in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics—
reinforcing Canada’s competitive advantage as a destination of choice for world-class researchers
(announced in Budget 2022).
The CERC is a Tri-agency program that is administered by the Tri-agency Institutional Programs
Secretariat (TIPS), which is housed within the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
and represents and coordinates the interests of the three federal granting agencies.
$78.5 million over 8 fiscal years, starting in 2023-24 ($5.8 million received through Supplementary
Estimates A). An additional $2.7 million was transferred from the other councils to CIHR over 7
fiscal years, starting in 2024-25, recalibrate the authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and
CIHR based proportionately on the research areas addressed by the successful applications.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.8
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
13.1
Net Change (in millions)
7.3
Funding Level Increases
Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF)
Description
The key objective of the CFREF is to help competitively selected Canadian postsecondary
institutions turn their key strengths into world- leading capabilities.
The Tri-Agency Steering Committee approved the results and integrity of the review process for the
third CFREF competition in February 2023. purpose of this transfer is to recalibrate the authorities
appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based proportionately on the research areas addressed
by the successful applications. For CIHR, this represents an additional $64.8M over 6 years starting
in 2024-25.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
47.2
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
58.4
Net Change (in millions)
11.2
Canada Graduate Scholarships
Description
The CGS program provides special recognition and financial support to students who are pursuing
masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada.
The increase is mainly the result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate
Scholarships allocations within the program, between the three granting agencies, to re-align with
the research landscape.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
39.2
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
41.8
Net Change (in millions)
2.8
Dementia and Brain Health in Aging
Description
Funding level increase to continue to support research across the continuum from promoting brain
health in aging to addressing the complex care needs of people living with dementia and their
caregivers.
Research activities focus on resilience, cognitive reserve and vulnerabilities in brain aging, as well
as modifiable factors for reduction of risk of development and progression of cognitive impairment
and dementia.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
3.1
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.3
Net Change (in millions)
2.2
Other - Increases
Compensation adjustments resulting from collective agreements
Description
Incemental funding to support salary increases of its employees.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
6.4
Net Change (in millions)
6.4
Gather national data on trends in drug use and harms in Canada
Description
Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) will support a Canada-wide study
on controlled substances that will generate baseline data for substance use on the current
situation relating to controlled substance use in Canada and signal emerging threats. Total funding
transfer from Health Canada to CIHR amounts to $6M over four fiscal years (2024- 25 to 2027-28).
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
1.5
Net Change (in millions)
1.5
Non-material variances under $1.5M
Description
A total of $1.9M comprised of non-material items with funding variances of under $1.5M.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
1.9
Sunset - Decreases
Pediatric Cancer Research
Description
Funding from Budget 2021 of $30M over three years to fund pediatric cancer research leading to the
development of new scientifically proven treatments and cures that can lead to better outcomes
and healthier lives for young patients.
This items sunsets in 2023-24.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
14.6
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(14.6)
Cervical Cancer in Canada
Description
Off-cycle funding of $10M was provided over five years, to support research on Human
papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination and screening methods to contribute to a reduction of cervical
cancer in Canada.
This item sunsets 2023-24.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
2.1
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(2.1)
Funding to address the Opioid crisis
Description
Funding from Budget 2019 and off-cycle budget decision of $7.2 over four years to fund research to
consolidate and analyze the results of pilot projects that offer safer alternatives to the illegal supply
and their impact on the communities within which they operate, and to to fund projects that
increase the evidence base on methamphetamine treatment guidelines and advance priority
research.
This item (tranche of fundig tied to the TB submission) sunsets in 2023-24, though supplementary
funds ($225K) have been transferred from HC to CIHR in 2024-25.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
2.4
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(2.4)
Other - Decreases
Reprofiling of the Clinical Trials Fund
Description
Funding level decrease due to the re-profile of funds from 2023-24 and 2024-25 to 2025-26 ad
2026-27 to support the final competition for clinical trials projects.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
81.4
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
76.7
Net Change (in millions)
(4.7)
Refocusing government spending to deliver for Canadians
Description
As part of meeting this commitment, CIHR is planning to reduce spending on its activities such as
travel and professional services.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(1.4)
Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plan
Description
A total decrease of $0.1M in net year-over-year changes related to employee benefit plan
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(0.1)
45. Recent OPQs
1. Q-1708
September 14, 2023 — Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock) — With regard to the government’s
safer supply program: (a) what were the projections showing a reduction of overdoses that were
used to justify implementing the program; (b) off of what methodology were the projections in (a)
based; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the number of overdoses increased
following the implementation of the program; and (d) when did the government first become aware
that its projections showing that overdoses would decrease were flawed and inaccurate?
2. Q-1754
September 25, 2023 — Mr. Lloyd (Sturgeon River—Parkland) — With regard to the upcoming tenth
session of the Conference of the Parties (COP10) to the World Health Organization (WHO)
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, from November 10 to 25, 2023, and the third session of
the Meeting of Parties (MOP3) to the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, from
November 27 to 30, 2023: (a) how many individuals will be part of the government's delegation and
what are their names and titles; (b) what is the overall budget for the government's COP10 and
MOP3 participation, broken down by (i) accommodations, (ii) meals or per diems, (iii) hospitality; (c)
what are the government's key priorities or action items for both the COP10 and MOP3; and (d) has
the government been assigned any specific agenda items or resolutions for both the COP1O and
MOP3, and, if so, what are they?
3. Q-1760
September 26, 2023 — Mr. Khanna (Oxford) — With regard to the government’s response to drug
addiction: (a) what are the government’s estimates on the number of Canadians who are addicted
to illicit drugs, broken down by substance; (b) for each substance in (a), what is the government’s
strategy to get those addicted into treatment and recovery, or to otherwise stop the addiction; (c)
how much funding is being provided for the treatment and recovery strategy, broken down by year
for the next five years; and (d) what are the government’s targets on how many fewer people will be
addicted to each substance in (a), broken down by substance and year for the next five years?
4. Q-1776
September 28, 2023 — Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock) — With regard to the government’s
“safe supply” initiative: (a) how much (i) heroin, (ii) crack cocaine, (iii) cocaine, (iv) fentanyl, (v)
methamphetamine or crystal methamphetamine, (vi) other substance, broken down by type, does
the government estimate was distributed as part of “safe supply” in total and broken down by year
since 2018; and (b) what is the breakdown of (a) by province or territory?
5. Q-1809
October 12, 2023 — Mr. Ellis (Cumberland—Colchester) — With regard to the government's
Substance Use and Addictions Program, broken down annually for each of the last five years: (a)
how much funding has been provided through the program; (b) how was the funding spent, broken
down by type of expenditure; (c) what are the details of the funding recipients, including (i) which
entities received funding through the program, including the name and location of each entity, (ii)
how much funding each entity receive, (iii) what the funding was intended for; (d) what was the
breakdown of the funding by province or territory and by municipal area, if known; and (e) what was
the breakdown of the funding by type of substance?
6. Q-2043
November 30, 2023 — Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake) — With regard to the
government's Substance Use and Addictions Program and the funding of London InterCommunity
Health Centre (LIHC) program: (a) what criteria has the government established to measure the
success of the LIHC program, and are these success criteria being met; (b) how frequently does the
government receive updates or reports from the LIHC regarding its performance and success in
meeting the specified criteria; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the number of
overdoses increased following the implementation of the program; (d) what is the government’s
explanation for why opioid- related deaths and hospitalizations are greater in the Middlesex—
London area compared to the rest of Ontario; (e) is the government studying or assessing the
diversion of drugs from the LIHC program; (f) what measures are being taken to prevent the
diversion of drugs from the LIHC program; and (g) how is the government educating the public
about the harms of diversion?
7. Q-2116
December 12, 2023 — Mr. Johns (Courtenay—Alberni) — With regard to Health Canada’s
Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), and broken down by fiscal year since 2021- 22: (a)
what are the details of all requests for funding from community-led and not-for-profit organizations,
including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester name, (iii) amount of funding requested, (iv)
amount of funding approved; (b) what is the total amount of funding that was requested by
community-led and not-for-profit organizations; (c) what is the total amount of funding that was
provided to community-led and not-for-profit organizations; (d) broken down by level of
government, what are the details of all funding transfers to provincial, territorial, or municipal
governments, including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester name, (iii) amount of funding
requested, and (iv) amount of funding approved; (e) what is the total amount of funding that was
requested by other levels of government; and (f) what was the total amount of funding provided to
other levels of government?
8. Q-2190
December 13, 2023 — Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake) — With regard to meetings
involving the government about safe supply, safer supply, pharmaceutical alternatives to the toxic,
illegal or illicit drug supply, pharmaceutical grade medication as an alternative to the toxic, illegal or
illicit drug supply, and medications for substance use disorder and to provide pharmaceutical
alternatives to the contaminated illegal or illicit drug supply: what are the details of meetings over
the last five years between government and pharmaceutical companies, government and opioid
manufacturers, government and lobby companies, and government and stakeholders, including,
for each, the (i) date, (ii) location, (iii) type and purpose of the meeting, (iv) names of the
organizations represented, (v) names and titles of the individuals in attendance, including both
government officials and other attendees?
9. Q-2204
December 14, 2023 — Mr. Davies (Vancouver Kingsway) — With regard to the federal tobacco
control strategy for fiscal year 2022-23: (a) what was the budget for the strategy; (b) how much of
that budget was spent within each fiscal year; (c) how much was spent on each component of the
strategy, specifically (i) mass media, (ii) policy and regulatory development, (iii) research, (iv)
surveillance, (v) enforcement, (vi) grants and contributions, (vii) programs for Indigenous
Canadians; (d) were any other activities not listed in (c) funded by the strategy, and, if so, how much
was spent on each of these activities; and (e) was part of the budget reallocated for purposes other
than tobacco control, and, if so, how much was reallocated?
10. Q-2522
April 9, 2024 — Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake) — With regard to funding allocated to
Pathways to Recovery's Safer Supply Ottawa Program through Health Canada's Substance Use and
Addictions Program (SUAP), since 2016: (a) what specific measures, if any, were implemented to
ensure that companies owned or operated by members of Pathway's board of directors did not
financially benefit from the funding; (b) prior to receiving the SUAP grants, did Pathways disclose
any conflicts of interest to the government, including whether or not any of their board of directors
would profit from funding provided; (c) do any of the terms within the funding agreements include
prohibitions on conflicts of interests and personal profit from the grants, and, if so, which
agreements include such terms and what are their summary; (d) what are the details of all funding
provided to Pathways, broken down by the (i) date, (ii) amount, (iii) project description; and (e) what
specific safeguards, if any, are in place to ensure that substances provided by Pathways do not end
up trafficked by drug dealers?
11. Q-2635
May 1, 2024 — Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake) — With regard to the government's safe
supply, safer supply and prescribed alternatives programs, broken down by year for the last two
years: (a) which companies were allowed to import drugs into Canada that were to be used under
the programs, broken down by drug that they were allowed to import; (b) how much of each drug
was each company (i) allowed to import, (ii) importing, into Canada; and (c) what are the details of
all contracts the government has had, or currently has, with companies related to providing drugs
for the programs, including, for each, the (i) date, (ii) vendor, (iii) value of the contract, (iv) amount of
drugs provided as part of the contract, in total and broken down by substance?
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO. Q-1708
BY Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock)
DATE September 14, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
QUESTION
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the government’s safer supply program: (a) what were the projections showing a
reduction of overdoses that were used to justify implementing the program; (b) off of what
methodology were the projections in (a) based; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the
number of overdoses increased following the implementation of the program; and (d) when did the
government first become aware that its projections showing that overdoses would decrease were
flawed and inaccurate?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Since 2017, guided by the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS), the Government of
Canada has taken a comprehensive approach to address substance use issues and the overdose
crisis, supported by over $1 billion in spending. There is no one-size-fits-all solution to prevent or
reduce overdose deaths — a full range of services and supports are needed. Safer supply sits within
a continuum of services where medications are prescribed in the context of a therapeutic
relationship between a healthcare provider and a patient. Safer supply services are informed by
well-established domestic and international evidence from medication-assisted treatment (MAT)
services, which are considered the gold standard of treatment for substance use disorder.
With regard to questions (a) and (b) above, surveillance conducted by the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) on the overdose crisis shows a significant increase in apparent opioid-toxicity
deaths in Canada beginning with the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, and rates remain elevated today.
PHAC also conducts forward modelling to provide estimates of how many opioid- related deaths
may occur over the coming months in Canada. Projections are based on assumptions regarding the
toxicity of the illegal drug supply and the impact of health interventions. The model considers all
health interventions together and does not report projections for specific interventions, such as
safer supply. The model is updated twice a year, in June and December.
Health Canada recognizes that additional high-quality evidence is needed that address potential
benefits and risks of safer supply. To help build this evidence, Health Canada is supporting
assessment and evaluation projects related to Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP)-
funded pilot projects. This includes a preliminary assessment of 10 safer supply pilot projects in
Ontario, British Columbia and New Brunswick. The federal government, through the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), is also supporting a study being conducted by a research
team from the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse. This four-year evaluation
research project focuses on program implementation and the short-term health outcomes of
eleven of the government funded safer supply pilot projects. The final results of this study are
expected in 2025. Additionally, CIHR has awarded $2 million to the University of Victoria to support
a four-year study evaluating the safer supply initiatives in British Columbia in partnership with
Indigenous leaders, Elders and system partners.
With regard to questions (c) and (d) above, there is no one single intervention alone that will reduce
overdose deaths and solve the overdose crisis. This crisis is being driven by a highly toxic illegal
drug supply and a number of underlying socio- economic factors. This is why the federal
government has taken a broad, comprehensive approach under the CDSS focusing on prevention,
treatment, harm reduction and enforcement.
All SUAP-funded safer supply pilot projects are time-limited, innovative interventions designed to
evaluate the effectiveness of providing pharmaceutical-grade medications as safer alternatives to
the contaminated illegal drug supply in Canada. These pilot projects must have linkages to
provincial and/or territorial health systems, involvement of people with lived and living experience
of substance use in design and planning, prescriber/health care provider oversight, and must
demonstrate commitments to research and evaluation.
Safer supply services exist in a limited number of locations in Canada, and currently serve a
relatively small number of clients compared to the total number of people who use drugs and who
are at risk of overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply in Canada. At the federal level, there are
29 funded pilot projects, serving approximately 4,300 clients nationally. The focus of federally
funded projects has been on building the evidence around this new practice.
Under the CDSS, the Government of Canada will continue to undertake a comprehensive and
evidence-based approach to substance use issues and the overdose crisis, including testing new
ideas and approaches to help save lives and reduce harms. We will continue to work with all levels
of governments and key stakeholders, who also have critical roles to play. We will continue to
monitor and assess all available evidence regarding our approach, including studying the outcomes
of safer supply pilot projects, to inform both current and future actions, and make adjustments
including implementing risk mitigation measures as appropriate.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO Q-1754
BY Mr. Lloyd (Sturgeon River—Parkland)
DATE September 25, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
QUESTION
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the upcoming tenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP10) to the World
Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, from November 10 to 25, 2023,
and the third session of the Meeting of Parties (MOP3) to the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in
Tobacco Products, from November 27 to 30, 2023: (a) how many individuals will be part of the
government's delegation and what are their names and titles; (b) what is the overall budget for the
government's COP10 and MOP3 participation, broken down by (i) accommodations, (ii) meals or
per diems, (iii) hospitality; (c) what are the government's key priorities or action items for both the
COP10 and MOP3; and (d) has the government been assigned any specific agenda items or
resolutions for both the COP1O and MOP3, and, if so, what are they?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
In accordance with the Directive on Travel, Hospitality, Conference and Event Expenditures, Health
Canada strives to find economical means of travel while considering alternatives that minimize or
limit travel costs. This includes limiting the number of departmental travellers to the minimum
necessary to deliver the business of government, making use of virtual options of participation
when available, and selecting economical meals of travel when booking transportation and
accommodations.
a. The Government of Canada plans to send a delegation of ten individuals to COP10, November
20-25, 2023, including:
Dr. Sonia Johnson, Director General, Tobacco Control Directorate (TCD), Controlled Substances
and Cannabis Branch (CSCB), Health Canada (HC)
Ms. Laura Smith, Director, Office of Policy and Strategic Planning (OPSP), TCD, CSCB, HC
Mr. Denis Choinière, Director, Tobacco Products Regulatory Office, TCD, CSCB, HC
Ms. Kemba Anderson-Gohlor, Regional Coordinator to the Conference of the Parties for the Region
of the Americas, and Manager, Regulatory and International Policy Unit, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
Mr. Dylan Upper, Acting Manager, Multilateral Relations Division, Office of International Affairs for
the Health Portfolio
Ms. Angélique Bisson, Senior Policy Analyst, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
Ms. Mireille Rigby, Senior Policy Analyst, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
One domestic Non-governmental Organization Representative
Two representatives from the Government of Québec (Provincial/territorial representatives –
travelling at their own expense)
b. The total cost of travel for COP10, for delegates whose travel is being funded by Health Canada,
is as follows:
i. Accommodations: $9,500
ii. Meals and per diems: $11,651
iii. Hospitality: N/A
Please note, flights are still in the process of being booked, therefore the final cost is unavailable at
this time. Estimated flights costs are: $16,500.
c. The government’s key priorities for COP10 are focused on bolstering the Framework Convention
on Tobacco Control implementation globally, enhancing transparency and accountability of the
COP and exploring measures that go beyond the FCTC. In particular, Canada will focus on:
1. Forward Looking Tobacco Control Measures: Canada has put forward a proposal to COP to
consider exploring tobacco control measures that extend beyond the provisions of the WHO
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC). Through this decision point, Canada’s aims to
generate new discussions on tobacco control and reinvigorate a collective response to the global
tobacco epidemic.
2. Supporting Global Implementation of the FCTC: Canada is committed to supporting a new peer-
review and evaluation support mechanism. Canada believes this mechanism will strengthen global
implementation of the FCTC, ensuring that its provisions are effectively translated into action at the
national level. The WHO Convention Secretariat report associated with this agenda item, can be
found at the following link: https://storage.googleapis.com/who-fctc-cop10-
source/Main%20documents/fctc-cop10-14-en.pdf
3. Enhancing Transparency and Accountability: Canada will advocate for increased transparency
and accountability of COP through webcasting the plenary sessions.
These priorities underscore Canada’s dedication to public health and our leadership in the global
tobacco control community.
d. Canada has not been assigned any specific agenda items for COP, but Canada will be presenting
a draft decision for adoption on “Forward looking tobacco control measures” as is detailed above.
The WHO Convention Secretariat report associated with this agenda item , can be found at the
following link: https://storage.googleapis.com/who-fctc-cop10- source/Main%20documents/fctc-
cop10-11-en.pdf
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO. Q-1760
BY Mr. Khanna (Oxford)
DATE September 26, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
QUESTION
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the government’s response to drug addiction: (a) what are the government’s
estimates on the number of Canadians who are addicted to illicit drugs, broken down by substance;
(b) for each substance in (a), what is the government’s strategy to get those addicted into treatment
and recovery, or to otherwise stop the addiction; (c) how much funding is being provided for the
treatment and recovery strategy, broken down by year for the next five years; and (d) what are the
government’s targets on how many fewer people will be addicted to each substance in (a), broken
down by substance and year for the next five years?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Since 2016, guided by the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS), the Government of
Canada has taken a comprehensive approach to address substance use issues and the overdose
crisis, supported by a full range of evidence-based actions, focused on prevention, harm reduction,
treatment and enforcement.
Regarding question (a) People’s substance use can change and move across a range over time,
from no use at one end to substance use disorder at the other end. Additionally, stigma associated
with substance use can cause individuals to hide their use. Given these considerations, it is
difficult to estimate the number of Canadians who have a substance use disorder.
Findings from the Mental Health Access to Care Survey, 2022 estimate that 0.5% percent of
Canadians met the criteria for recurrent use with associated harms or dependence of substances
such as cocaine, ecstasy, hallucinogens (e.g., PCP, LSD), heroin, solvents, other illegal drugs and
nonmedical use of prescription sedatives, analgesics, stimulants in the past 12 months and 3.6%
of Canadians met the criteria at some point in their lifetime. These estimates were unchanged (i.e.,
the differences were not statistically significant) from 0.7% and 4.0%, respectively, in 2012.
Regarding question (b) and (c) Health care and addressing substance use is a shared responsibility
with provinces and territories. While provinces and territories are primarily responsible for the
delivery of substance-use treatment services, the federal government has a role to play in
supporting the availability of evidence-based treatment options. The Government of Canada
recognizes that improved access to treatment services can help those struggling with substance
use and save lives. This includes actions such as:
Removing barriers to accessing medications used for the treatment of opioid use disorder by:
Issuing a class exemption for patients, practitioners, and pharmacists prescribing and providing
controlled substances in Canada to ensure continuity of care;
Approving injectable hydromorphone and diacetylmorphine as treatment options for patients with
severe opioid use disorder; and,
Facilitating the prescribing and dispensing of methadone and diacetylmorphine through regulatory
amendments.
Funding the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse to identify or develop appropriate
evidence-based clinical and community-based interventions for substance use and to facilitate
providers and decision-makers in implementing services that we know are effective. This includes
guidance documents for the treatment of opioid and other substance use disorders.
Partnering with the Standards Council of Canada to coordinate the development of standards for
mental health and substance use health services in key areas, including withdrawal management
and competencies for non-addictions healthcare providers, with a focus on health equity.
To support the timely access to quality mental health and substance use services for individuals in
Canada, regardless of where they live. The Government of Canada also provides support to
provinces and territories in their direct delivery of substance-use treatment services through
investments. For example, through Budget 2023, the Government of Canada is providing
$196.1 billion over ten years, including $46.2 billion in new funding through the Canada Health
Transfer and other mechanisms, for provinces and territories to improve health care services for
Canadians, which includes $25 billion over ten years to provinces and territories for bilateral
agreements to address unique needs in four shared health priorities, including access to quality
mental health and substance use services.
In addition, the federal government will invest $2 billion over 10 years to support Indigenous
priorities and $505 million over 5 years in complementary federal support.
These investments build on previous federal initiatives aimed at supporting the provinces and
territories in improving access to treatment and recovery services for substance use disorders,
including:
Significant investments from the Government of Canada in treatment services, including
committing $150 million through Budget 2018 for the Emergency Treatment Fund, which ended in
March 2023. This funding was matched by the provinces and territories, bringing the total
investment to $300 million.
Provinces and territories have used federal investments to expand treatment approaches such as
services to support youth with substance use disorder, withdrawal management services
appropriate for people who use methamphetamine, Rapid Access Addictions Medicine clinics,
expand access to opioid dependence treatments, and culturally-appropriate care for Indigenous
communities.
Funds have also been used to implement innovative approaches to treatment including ‘wrap-
around’ care and the development of telehealth infrastructure to connect clients to treatment in
remote and rural settings.
The Government of Canada invested $5 billion over ten years in 2017 to support the provinces and
territories in improving access to mental health and substance use services and supports. Federal,
provincial and territorial governments also agreed as part of A Common Statement of Principles on
Shared Health Priorities, to report on progress on improving access to these services through the
Canadian Institute for Health Information.
Budget 2023 also provides $359.2 million to support the implementation of a renewed CDSS for
new and on-going activities to support a continuum of care for people who use substances,
including prevention, treatment, harm reduction, and recovery.
The funding announced in Budget 2023 will complement the more than $505 million since 2017
that SUAP has already committed to over 380 innovative and evidence-informed projects including
substance use prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across the country. Through
active SUAP agreements, $156.1 million is committed over the next 5 years (Fiscal Year (FY)
2023/24 to FY 2027/28) to fund a wide-range of projects that address substance use issues across
the continuum of care. Of this funding, $63.25 million has been committed to organizations that
deliver treatment and recovery initiatives. The table below provides a breakdown of this funding by
fiscal year:
SUAP Funding: Treatment and Recovery Projects FY 23/24 FY 24/25 FY 25/26 Total
$26,448,050 $34,067,162 $2,730,205 $63,245,417
Regarding question (d) The Government of Canada is committed to reporting on results of the CDSS
through Health Canada’s Departmental Results Report.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO. Q-1776
BY Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock)
DATE September 28, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
QUESTION
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the government’s “safe supply” initiative: (a) how much (i) heroin, (ii) crack cocaine,
(iii) cocaine, (iv) fentanyl, (v) methamphetamine or crystal methamphetamine, (vi) other substance,
broken down by type, does the government estimate was distributed as part of “safe supply” in total
and broken down by year since 2018; and (b) what is the breakdown of (a) by provinces and
territories?
Health Canada
Most healthcare services that support people who use drugs fall under provincial and territorial
jurisdiction, and the federal government does not routinely collect detailed information on drug
treatment or safer supply programs that are run by provinces and territories.
It should be noted that prescribers can only prescribe medications pursuant to the requirements of
the Food and Drug Act, the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, and their associated
Regulations. Illegally produced drugs such as crystal methamphetamine and crack cocaine do not
exist in pharmaceutical form, and thus are not used in medication-assisted drug treatment
programs or safer supply programs.
For its part, Health Canada provides time-limited grants and contributions funding to 29 safer
supply pilot projects to help save lives and build evidence in terms of both benefits and risks of
safer supply. Of these 29 projects, 4 focus on research, knowledge exchange, and evaluation, and
24 provide services directly to clients in BC, Ontario, and New Brunswick. Federal grants and
contributions funding is also provided to the Government of Quebec directly to help support
substance use services delivered by the province, including safer supply (counted as 1 project)
The following table provides the most up to data available on substances used in Health Canada
funded, safer supply projects. These medications evolve over time at the discretion of prescribers,
based on the clients they serve. Some of the medications are prescribed on-label for opioid use
disorder, and some are prescribed off-label (i.e. not for their labeled indication).
Substance BC (8 projects) ON (15 projects) NB (1 projects) Total (24 projects)
Fentanyl 7 4 1 12
(various formulations offered, including patches and tablets)
Tablet hydromorphone 8 13 0 21
Injectable hydromorphone 4 4 1 9
Injectable diacetylmorphine 1 - - 1
Oxycodone 2 2 - 4
Stimulant Therapy 3 8 1 12
(various formulations offered, including amphetamine/dextroamphetamine, lisdexamfetamine
dimesylate, and methylphenidate)
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO. Q-1809
BY Mr. Ellis (Cumberland—Colchester)
DATE October 12, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
QUESTION
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the government's Substance Use and Addictions Program, broken down annually for
each of the last five years: (a) how much funding has been provided through the program; (b) how
was the funding spent, broken down by type of expenditure; (c) what are the details of the funding
recipients, including (i) which entities received funding through the program, including the name
and location of each entity, (ii) how much funding each entity receive, (iii) what the funding was
intended for; (d) what was the breakdown of the funding by province or territory and by municipal
area, if known; and (e) what was the breakdown of the funding by type of substance?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
a. Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides time-limited grants
and contributions funding that supports evidence-informed initiatives that help to address the
overdose crisis and substance use issues. Between 2019 and 2024, over $450M has been provided
through the program. The SUAP funding broken down annually for each of the last five years is as
follows by fiscal year (FY):
FY 2019/2020: $37,417,022
FY 2020/2021: $63,154,980
FY 2021/2022: $85,313,019
FY 2022/2023: $140,061,872
FY 2023/2024: $124,369,591
Total: $450,316,484
b. Program grants and contribution funding is allocated to recipient organizations in support of a
defined set of activities. Eligible expenses are defined under the SUAP Terms and Conditions,
described in the Guidelines for Applicants for each SUAP call for proposals and outlined in the
Contribution Agreements. Health Canada does not track individual expenditures by each
organization. Rather, in accordance with the Policy on Transfer Payments, all SUAP program funding
recipients must provide a detailed cashflow forecast once per year, as well as a record of
expenditures twice per year. Payments are made in the form of reimbursement to program
recipients for eligible expenditures incurred following acceptance by internal oversight and control
systems.
c. A full summary of the 374 funding recipients which received funding from 2019/20 to 2023/24 is
attached (see Annex A). This document includes a list of organization names, project titles and
description, location including city and province, amount of funding committed and what the
funding was or is intended for, for each entity. Please note that this data was extracted on October
13, 2023.
d. The following figures show the breakdown of SUAP funding through 2019/20-2023/24 by
province/territory and by municipal area:
Note: The number of projects funded in each province or territory can vary based on several factors.
Regions with a higher population or with a higher concentration of national-scope not-for-profit
organizations, such as Ontario, have a larger number of active projects than smaller jurisdictions.
As per a 2017 agreement between the Minister of Health and Quebec’s Ministère de la Santé et des
Services sociaux (MSSS), SUAP funding proportionate to Quebec’s percentage of the Canadian
population (approximately 22.5% of total SUAP funding), is allocated to Quebec. Under this
agreement, SUAP has signed Contribution Agreements directly with the MSSS and the MSSS works
with partner organizations to redistribute SUAP funds within the province. Other projects funded in
the province are national in scope.
ALBERTA
29 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Atikameg - - - $109,489 $39,320 $148,809
Calgary $735,539 $1,075,894 $2,456,173 $4,089,249 $3,067,653 $11,424,508
Eden Valley - - - $721,072 $678,968 $1,400,040
Edmonton $464,879 $1,151,515 $1,778,122 $3,709,041 $1,383,361 $8,486,918
Edmonton & Calgary - $158,873 $175,375 $116,202 $29,775 $480,225
Fort McMurray - - - $440,973 $299,386 $740,359
Grand Prairie - - - $120,138 $921,522 $1,041,660
Onoway - - $150,000 $150,000 - $300,000
Standoff - - - $688,028 $467,117 $1,155,145
Stony Plain - - - $502,914 $1,969,485 $2,472,399
$27,650,063
BRITISH COLUMBIA
90 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Agassiz - - - $20,150 $253,123 $273,273
Burnaby - - - $401,825 $541,429 $943,254
Campbell River - - - $1,508,724 $1,515,951 $3,024,675
Chilliwack - - - $103,361 $930,247 $1,033,608
Comox - - - $10,000 $65,000 $75,000
Delta - - - $167,969 $1,146,441 $1,314,410
Houston - - $210,700 $212,303 $212,303 $635,306
Kelowna - $174,250 $291,750 $712,396 $492,042 $1,670,438
Mission - - - $14,450 $150,921 $165,371
Nanaimo - - - $864,488 $701,288 $1,565,776
Nelson $20,000 $262,000 $284,000 $397,985 $397,985 $1,361,970
New Westminster - - - $231,450 $567,151 $798,601
Pender Island - $11,523 $165,356 $168,056 $168,056 $512,991
Penticton - - - $7,390 $166,966 $174,356
Port Alberni - - - $214,975 $212,054 $427,029
Powell River - - - $19,357 $148,479 $167,836
Quesnel - - - $308,310 $268,901 $577,211
Squamish - - - $571,432 $747,545 $1,318,977
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Surrey - $452,791 $818,192 $1,677,526 $1,961,621 $4,910,130
Vancouver $6,891,832 $11,824,700 $13,502,597 $21,064,125 $16,611,057 $69,894,311
Victoria $1,030,769 $2,487,258 $3,964,319 $6,179,448 $5,140,882 $18,802,676
$109,647,199
MANITOBA
22 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Brandon - - - $150,744 $124,281 $275,025
Pine Falls - - - $68,670 $68,867 $137,537
Pine Falls & Selkirk - $26,606 $37,129 $127,261 $130,000 $320,996
Steinbach - - - $64,200 $491,400 $555,600
Winnipeg $1,099,409 $1,607,378 $2,944,375 $4,318,971 $4,991,728 $14,961,861
$16,251,019
NEW BRUNSWICK
6 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Eel Ground - - - - $600,257 $600,257
Fredericton $238,998 $897,867 $1,502,406 $1,497,195 $1,512,276 $5,648,742
Moncton - - - $422,593 $370,570 $793,163
Saint John $346,367 $208,692 $100,913 $42,530 $352,035 $1,050,537
$8,092,699
NEWFOUNDLAND
11 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Bell Island - - - $281,850 $344,725 $626,575
Clarenville & Bonavista - - - $126,107 $91,373 $217,480
Goose Bay - - - $160,280 $113,869 $274,149
Mount Pearl - - - $12,605 $96,684 $109,289
Nunatsiavut - $97,963 $146,214 $181,214 - $425,391
St. John’s $445,774 $436,774 $250,415 $452,969 $1,421,457 $3,007,389
$4,660,273
NOVA SCOTIA
13 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Cape Breton - - - $356,466 $135,763 $492,229
Halifax - $212,657 $763,109 $1,741,032 $2,702,791 $5,419,589
Kentville - - - $113,500 $57,000 $170,500
Sydney - - - $189,435 $128,611 $318,046
Yarmouth $285,801 $285,801 $208,909 - - $780,511
$7,180,875
NORTHWEST TERRITORIES
3 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Fort McPherson - - - $140,000 $50,278 $190,278
Yellowknife $1,077,873 $328,110 $584,161 $1,564,551 $1,417,051 $4,971,746
$5,162,024
NUNAVUT
1 project from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Hamlet of Pangnirtung - - - - $172,011 $172,011
$172,011
ONTARIO
174 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Aurora - - - $44,037 $329,637 $373,674
Belleville - - - $59,400 $471,748 $531,148
Birch Island $201,718 $320,770 $263,390 - - $785,878
Bothwell - $169,705 $155,705 $155,703 $155,700 $636,813
Brantford - - $480,521 $811,131 $816,694 $2,108,346
Chatham - - - $46,536 $356,955 $403,491
Concord - - - $427,016 $153,353 $580,369
Garden Village - - - $225,000 $161,606 $386,606
Guelph $50,629 $51,055 $817,265 $2,814,140 $2,201,681 $5,934,770
Hamilton $101,225 - $744,483 $2,330,389 $2,887,625 $6,063,722
Kingston $166,500 - - $983,915 $353,349 $1,503,764
Kitchener - $190,685 $1,058,100 $2,695,310 $2,084,892 $6,028,987
Lanark - $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 - $300,000
Lindsay - - $212,800 $292,887 $359,450 $865,137
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
London $103,300 $2,064,705 $3,278,128 $5,151,235 $3,140,108 $13,737,476
M’Chigeeng - - $471,019 $1,028,137 $400,000 $1,899,156
Markdale - - - $30,949 $237,394 $268,343
Markham $257,187 - - - - $257,187
Massey - $187,500 $187,500 $187,500 - $562,500
Midland - - - $39,888 $300,982 $340,870
North York - - - $288,589 $195,929 $484,518
Newmarket - $22,689 $99,680 $71,231 - $193,600
North Bay - $136,135 $310,000 $108,865 - $555,000
Ohsweken - $137,077 $342,693 $497,093 $299,722 $1,276,585
Ottawa $5,622,458 $10,855,176 $15,076,379 $21,010,788 $15,600,570 $68,165,371
Owen Sound - - - $982,074 $968,732 $1,950,806
Peterborough $34,045 $626,340 $1,294,654 $2,481,731 $2,314,980 $6,751,750
Sault Ste. Marie $353,470 $342,049 $370,666 $224,685 $56,955 $1,347,825
Scarborough - $158,018 $239,050 $337,306 $414,442 $1,148,816
Shelburne $133,116 $402,011 $909,557 - - $1,444,684
Sioux Lookout - $785,842 $918,696 $918,696 $945,456 $3,568,690
Stony Point - $175,383 $251,592 $269,865 - $696,840
St. Catharines - - - $898,363 $322,626 $1,220,989
Sudbury - - - $439,586 $844,558 $1,284,144
Thornhill - $1,000,000 - - - $1,000,000
Thunder Bay $366,000 $121,447 $123,123 $922,859 $1,099,391 $2,632,820
Toronto $8,682,157 $11,538,682 $12,767,913 $17,534,571 $20,804,173 $71,327,496
Vaughn $166,500 - - - - $166,500
Waterloo $761,520 $1,392,235 $1,847,133 $1,208,460 $1,177,163 $6,386,511
Wikwemikong $195,486 $195,303 $133,780 $192,119 $103,244 $819,932
$215,991,114
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND
3 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Charlottetown - $86,986 $284,285 $759,495 $425,161 $1,555,927
$1,555,927
QUÉBEC
5 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Gatineau - - - $43,504 $246,763 $290,267
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Montreal $25,000 - - $1,595,777 - $1,620,777
Québec $6,108,800 $8,049,055 $9,645,730 $9,028,350 $3,097,307 $35,929,242
(transfer to MSSS)
$37,840,286
SASKATCHEWAN
11 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Nipawing - $123,246 $203,416 $369,001 $40,415 $736,078
Prince Albert $170,253 $304,631 $53,350 $299,052 - $827,286
Regina $720,771 $854,467 $1,091,335 $545,978 $1,128,252 $4,340,803
Saskatoon $480,295 $889,333 $879,005 $3,600,583 $2,179,626 $8,028,842
$13,933,009
YUKON
6 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Pelly Crossing - - - $68,311 $776,500 $844,811
Whitehorse $79,350 $173,803 $367,856 $426,768 $287,397 $1,335,174
$2,179,985
e. The following figures show the breakdown of the total funding for each fiscal year, by type of
substance:
Substance FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Alcohol $280,281 $255,302 $1,088,195 $2,101,352 $1,755,30 $5,480,430
Cannabis $12,454,675 $14,899,484 $14,076,909 $9,637,091 $3,374,073 $54,442,232
Methamphetamine $575,021 $2,448,178 $3,416,571 $4,687,784 $3,040,210 $14,167,764
Opioids $14,240,523 $27,534,465 $41,014,157 $68,524,100 $65,421,05 $216,734,303
Tobacco $1,844,429 $3,417,080 $3,522,392 $3,464,880 $3,330,781 $15,579,562
Multiple $8,022,092 $14,600,471 $22,194,795 $51,646,665 $47,448,170 $143,912,193
$450,316,484
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO. Q-2043
BY Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake)
DATE November 30, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the government's Substance Use and Addictions Program and the funding of London
InterCommunity Health Centre (LIHC) program: (a) what criteria has the government established to
measure the success of the LIHC program, and are these success criteria being met; (b) how
frequently does the government receive updates or reports from the LIHC regarding its performance
and success in meeting the specified criteria; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the
number of overdoses increased following the implementation of the program; (d) what is the
government’s explanation for why opioid-related deaths and hospitalizations are greater in the
Middlesex—London area compared to the rest of Ontario; (e) is the government studying or
assessing the diversion of drugs from the LIHC program; (f) what measures are being taken to
prevent the diversion of drugs from the LIHC program; and (g) how is the government educating the
public about the harms of diversion?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives (otherwise known as “safer supply”) involves the
prescribing of pharmaceutical-grade drugs as an alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply, with the
goal of reducing overdoses and saving lives. These programs are part of a suite of services for
individuals and can also connect people to other critical services and supports such as:
Primary healthcare
Mental health services
Housing
Job training
Drug treatment for those who are ready.
With regard to questions (a) and (b), above, Health Canada monitors and assesses federally-funded
safer supply pilot programs, including LIHC, in two ways.
First, recipient organizations provide Health Canada project-level reporting. Recipients, including
LIHC, are required to have a Performance Measurement and Evaluation Plan (PME) in place that is
used by Health Canada to monitor and measure the success of their project. The LIHC reports
biannually on the required indicators from their PME plan as part of their progress reports. Within
three months from their project end date, recipients including LIHC, provide a final performance
report to Health Canada. Performance indicators that must be reported on are the following:
SHORT TERM INDICATORS
OUTCOMES
1.1 Primary target population (Canadians or Stakeholders) have access to information on
substance use
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a. # of participants reached (by gender, language, age, location or priority population: Indigenous,
2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities) in substance use- related learning opportunities
delivered by SUAP funded project
b. # of primary target population (Canadians or stakeholders) with access to substance use-related
knowledge products developed by SUAP funded project
c. % of primary target population (Canadians or stakeholders) who reported that they gained
knowledge/skills about substances as a result of the SUAP funded project by gender, language, age,
location or priority population: Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities
OUTCOMES
1.2 Increased availability of harm reduction services
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a. # of new services offered by SUAP funded project (including type of service)
b. # of clients accessing services offered by SUAP funded projects (by gender, language, age,
location, or priority population: Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities)
c. # of Naloxone kits distributed by SUAP funded project
MEDIUM TERM INDICATORS
Targeted may include adults and target sub- as identified and This relates targeting behaviour
groups of Targeted Canadians youth, any other groups or populations by research evidence. to
initiatives individual change (or individuals)
OUTCOMES
2.1 Data and research evidence on drugs, substance use, and emerging drug trends are used by
targeted stakeholders
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a. % of targeted stakeholders who reported that they used knowledge/skills related to substance
use provided by this project to make evidence informed improvements to policies, programs and
practice
b. % of targeted stakeholders who reported that they intend to use knowledge/skills provided by this
project to make evidence informed improvements to policies, programs and practice
OUTCOMES
2.2 Reduction in risk-taking behaviour among people with problematic drug and substances use
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a. % of targeted Canadians who reported that they used knowledge/skills related to substance use
provided by SUAP funded project by gender, language, age, location, or priority population:
Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities)
b. % of targeted Canadians who reported that they intend to use knowledge/skills related to
substance use provided by SUAP funded project (by gender, language, age, location, or priority
population: Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities)
c. % of clients in SUAP funded treatment and/or harm reduction services projects reporting a
positive behaviour/health outcome by gender, language, age, location, or priority population:
Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities
Stakeholders may include other levels of governments, pan-Canadian health organizations, non-
profit organizations, communities or others at the organizational or system level. This relates to
initiatives targeting organization, system or policy and practice change.
Services Categories currently include: harm reduction / outreach; early intervention; treatment
(OAT, iOAT, TiOAT, methamphetamine treatment, nicotine vaping cessation); drug checking; safer
supply; surveillance.
At this time, LIHC is exceeding most of their targets in their PME. Health Canada officials meet
every 30 to 60 days with representatives of the LIHC program to discuss workplan activities.
Ongoing communication occurs in between meetings. LIHC has fulfilled reporting requirements on
time and is proactive at communicating important project information as it comes up.
The second manner Health Canada monitors and assesses performance is through information
gathering, research, studies and program evaluations of the pilot projects. These are undertaken by
both Health Canada and independent researchers. The focus of this work is on program operations,
barriers and challenges, and program outcomes (such as reductions in overdoses, improvements in
health, connections to health and social services, impacts on criminal activities associated with
substance use, impacts on healthcare costs, etc.). Health Canada is seeing some promising early
outcomes, including reduced emergency department visits and hospitalizations. We are also
hearing reports from safer supply clients of reduced overdoses, reduced illegal drug use, and
reduced criminal activity, along with improvements to physical and mental health, and better
access to wrap- around services like housing and income supports.
The federal government has supported two assessment and evaluation projects related to the pilot
projects funded through SUAP, in which the LIHC has participated. This includes a preliminary
assessment of 10 pilot projects in Ontario, British Columbia and New Brunswick, and a study being
conducted by a research team from the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM).
In addition, external, peer-reviewed and published research, specific to the LIHC safer supply
program demonstrated an attributable decline in emergency department visits and hospital
admissions among program participants.
With regard to questions (c) and (d), above, the scale of the overdose crisis in Canada is
unprecedented. Tragically, the rates of overdose deaths have been increasing in a number of
jurisdictions in Canada, the vast majority of which do not have safer supply programs in place. The
toxicity of the illegal drug supply continues to be a major driver of the overdose crisis. The latest
available national data shows that 84% of all apparent opioid toxicity deaths in the period of
January to June 2023 involved fentanyl (an increase of 47% since 2016) and 80% involved opioids
that were only non-pharmaceutical.
Data shows that in Ontario opioid-related deaths and hospitalizations have increased significantly
in recent years, which is consistent with national trends.
Many jurisdictions and municipalities across Ontario have been tragically impacted by the toxicity
of the illegal drug supply, including the Middlesex-London area
The overdose crisis is a complex public health issue that affects each part of the country differently
and can fluctuate over time. As such, changes to death and harm rates in Middlesex-London
cannot be attributed to one specific factor. Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada
continue to monitor and analyze data to better assess impacts and longer-term trends.
Scientific research and evidence show that in order to save lives and protect the health and safety
of Canadians, a comprehensive evidence-based approach that includes a full continuum of
supports is necessary, including harm reduction services as well as treatment, prevention, and
enforcement.
Part of this approach includes support for safer supply projects. It should be noted that the reach of
federally-funded safer supply projects is small compared to the total number of people who use
drugs in Canada and who are at risk of overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply. For example,
the 29 pilot projects currently funded by Health Canada have an estimated client base of 4300
people.
With regard to questions (e) and (f), above, Health Canada takes concerns regarding diversion
seriously and monitors for this risk across the supply chain for controlled substances in Canada. At
the federal level, the drugs used in projects offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives are
regulated as controlled substances and are subject to controls under the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act (CDSA) and its regulations, including laws and regulations around storage,
transport, and measures to help prevent diversion. Programs offering prescribed pharmaceutical
alternatives must also follow provincial/territorial laws and regulations pertaining to prescribing of
pharmaceutical drugs containing controlled substances. Furthermore, the healthcare providers
running the programs are subject to oversight from their professional regulatory colleges.
In addition, projects offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives have implemented a range of
measures to help prevent diversion and ensure participant and community safety. These include
diversion mitigation protocols, client education around the risks and consequences of diversion,
and monitoring through urine drug screens and other client assessment tools. These activities are
often complemented by comprehensive wrap-around care, client engagement, and requirements
around secure storage.
The LIHC program requires each client to adhere to a set of guidelines in order to participate in the
program. These are outlined during the initial intake and in the Therapeutic Agreement and include
expectations to:
attend weekly appointments with their doctor, submit weekly urine samples and pick up their
medication as directed at their specified pharmacy
be honest with their doctor regarding drug use outside of their Safer Supply prescription
work with outreach workers, care facilitators, and/or systems navigators on social goals (housing,
ODSP, ID, etc.)
not sell or otherwise divert their Safer Supply medication.
In cases where diversion may be suspected, many programs take a progressive mitigation approach
that can be escalated to witnessed dosing, or client discharge/transfer. Diversion represents a
reason for removal from the LIHC Safer Opioid Supply program.
Health Canada is currently assessing the risk mitigation approaches of all federally-funded projects
offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives to better understand emerging practices and see if
and where they may be strengthened.
With regard to question (g), above, the Government of Canada takes a number of steps to inform
the public about substance use harms, including risks related to the use of prescription drugs that
have been diverted from their intended use.
Since 2017, over $44M has been committed for prevention and education activities, including, but
not limited to, $22.8M to support public education campaigns, such as:
The Know More Opioids campaign that engages teens and young adults on the facts surrounding
opioids, ways to reduce risks and the harms of stigma. Between April 2018 and November 2023, the
Know More tour had over 178,000 interactions with people through school and festival events and
over 1,400 virtual and 380 in-person high school sessions.
The Ease the Burden campaign which seeks to raise awareness and reduce harms associated with
the use of opioids and other substances as well as stigma, especially for men in physically
demanding jobs. Between September 2022 to March 2023, the Ease the Burden webpage exceeded
142.7M views and views of the campaign video have exceeded over 26.8M.
Health Canada also has a number of resources on its webpage to help inform the public about
prescription drugs and their associated benefits and risks, resources on how to use medications
safely, including advice on proper storage and disposal, which are important steps in reducing the
risk of diversion.
In addition, Health Canada works with industry, regulated health professionals, and provincial
regulatory colleges on how they can help to minimize substances misuse and diversion, including
guidance on reporting a loss or theft.
The overdose crisis is a complex public health issue. Health Canada recognizes that no single
organization or level of government can solve this situation alone. We remain committed to working
with a wide range of partners, including provinces and territories, Indigenous partners, other levels
of government, civil society organizations, direct care providers, researchers, and people with lived
and living experience to support people who use substances, advance solutions to save lives, and
help end this national public health crisis.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.Q-2116
BY Mr. Johns (Courtenay—Alberni)
DATE December 12, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
QUESTION
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), and broken down
by fiscal year since 2021- 22: (a) what are the details of all requests for funding from community-led
and not-for-profit organizations, including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester name, (iii)
amount of funding requested, (iv) amount of funding approved; (b) what is the total amount of
funding that was requested by community-led and not-for-profit organizations; (c) what is the total
amount of funding that was provided to community-led and not-for-profit organizations; (d) broken
down by level of government, what are the details of all funding transfers to provincial, territorial, or
municipal governments, including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester name, (iii) amount of
funding requested, and (iv) amount of funding approved; (e) what is the total amount of funding that
was requested by other levels of government; and (f) what was the total amount of funding provided
to other levels of government?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
a. Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides time-limited grants
and contributions funding that supports evidence-informed initiatives that help to address the
overdose crisis and substance use issues. SUAP received 454 funding requests from fiscal year
2021-2022 to present. Of these requests, 182 were approved for funding and signed contribution
agreements. The detailed tables below include information on the projects that received funding
since fiscal year 2021-2022.
b. The total amount of funding requested by community-led and not-for-profit organizations,
including other levels of government, since 2021-2022 is $454,538,192.
c. The total amount of funding approved for community-led and not-for-profit organizations,
including other levels of government, since 2021-2022 is $ 211,125,399.
d. The table below includes information on SUAP funding approved for other levels of government
(provincial, territorial, municipal) from fiscal year 2021-2022 to present.
e. SUAP received 34 funding requests from other levels of government in 2021-2022, valued at
$24,560,225. No funding requests from other levels of government were submitted in 2022-2023.
SUAP received one (1) funding request from the Government of Quebec for 2023-2024 valued at
$58,198,973.
f. Of the requests received, 25 projects with other levels of government have been funded by SUAP
since 2021-2022, with a combined funding value of $76,064,814.
A summary of SUAP funding approved for other levels of government is included in the detailed
table below.
Note: Due to the principles set out in the Access to Information Act and the Privacy Act on
protecting sensitive, third-party data, the tables below do not include the date of the request,
requester name and amount of funding requested for applicants, including other levels of
government, that were not approved for SUAP funding. The amount of funding requested for each of
the organizations that were not approved for funding is information of business value that cannot be
released without the written consent of those organizations.
Note also that the 2023 SUAP Call for Proposals ended on November 22, 2023 and is still being
processed. Information on the proposals received and funded is not yet available.
SUAP Funding Summary
(Note: This table excludes funding to other levels of government)
Fiscal Year 2021-2022
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
1. Addiction Services Central Ontario 2021-09-24 $692,419
2. AIDS Committee of Newfoundland & Labrador Inc. 2021-09-24 $217,480
3. Alberni Valley Drug and Alcohol Prevention Services Society 2021-09-24 $427,029
4. Alberta Alliance Who Educates and Advocates Responsibly Society 2021-09-24 $790,927
5. Ally Centre of Cape Breton 2021-09-24 $318,046
6. Atira Women's Resource Society 2021-09-24 $656,786
7. AVI Health and Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $1,565,776
8. AVI Health and Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $3,024,675
9. AVI Health and Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $456,331
10. BC Yukon Association of Drug War Survivors 2021-09-24 $380,365
11. Bell Island Sobriety, Housing and Employment Inc. 2021-09-24 $626,575
12. Belleville and Quinte West Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $937,491
13. Black Coalition for AIDS Prevention of Metropolitan Toronto 2021-09-24 $321,516
14. Blood Ties Four Directions Centre Society 2021-09-24 $257,368
15. Board of Education of School District No. 62 (Sooke) 2021-09-24 $120,930
16. Burnaby Family Life Institute 2021-09-24 $135,029
17. Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance 2021-09-24 $597,488
18. Canadian AIDS Treatment Information Exchange 2021-09-24 $322,410
19. Canadian Apprenticeship Forum 2021-09-24 $629,590
20. Canadian Association of People Who Use Drugs 2021-03-17 $1,665,761
21. Canadian Mental Health Association Waterloo Wellington Branch 2021-09-24 $163,775
22. Cape Breton Association of People Empowering Drug Users 2021-09-24 $492,229
23. Centre for ADD/ADHD Awareness Canada 2021-09-24 $183,890
24. Centre for Addiction and Mental Health 2021-09-24 $2,251,794
25. Centre for Addiction and Mental Health 2021-09-24 $841,212
26. Centre for Effective Practice 2021-06-17 $895,288
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
27. Centre of Excellence for Women’s Health 2021-06-16 $708,129
28. Centretown Community Health Centre Inc. 2021-09-24 $1,353,365
29. Christie Ossington Neighbourhood Centre 2021-09-24 $380,845
30. CHUM / Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse - Quebec- Atlantic
2021-09-24 $1,595,777
31. Community Justice Initiatives (Waterloo Region Crime Prevention Council)
2021-06-18 $378,763
32. Community-Based Research Centre Society 2021-06-17 $434,533
33. Comox Bay Care Society 2021-09-24 $140,000
34. Connective Support Society 2021-09-24 $144,429
35. Covenant Health 2021-09-24 $957,069
36. CUPS Calgary Society 2021-09-24 $1,213,961
37. Dalhousie University (Solutions for Kids in Pain) 2021-09-24 $613,062
38. Dan's Legacy Foundation 2021-09-24 $2,505,185
39. Digital Public Square 2021-09-24 $1,343,704
40. Downtown Eastside Women’s Centre Association 2021-09-24 $144,429
41. Dr. Peter AIDS Foundation (Canadian Aboriginal AIDS Network) 2021-06-15 $1,891,529
42. Elizabeth Fry Society of Ottawa 2021-09-24 $884,371
43. Elizabeth Fry Society of Peterborough 2021-09-24 $432,820
44. First Light St. John's Friendship Centre 2021-09-24 $375,688
45. Fort McMurray 468 First Nation 2021-09-24 $740,359
46. Fraser House Society 2021-09-24 $294,808
47. Georgian Bay Native Women's Association 2021-09-24 $374,827
48. Gitpo Spirit Lodge 2021-09-24 $1,193,514
49. Go-Give Project 2021-09-24 $938,417
50. Grand River Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $792,148
51. Grey Bruce Health Services 2021-09-24 $1,950,806
52. Hamilton Police Service 2021-09-24 $207,561
53. Hamilton Urban Core Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $2,476,623
54. Hamsmart Community Health Collective 2021-09-24 $428,100
55. Inner City Family Health Team 2021-09-24 $992,114
56. Jean Tweed Treatment Centre 2021-09-24 $805,534
57. Kainai Food Bank Society 2021-09-24 $1,155,145
58. Kee Tas Kee Now Tribal Council 2021-09-24 $148,809
59. Lawson Research Institute 2021-09-24 $509,376
60. L'Espoir de la Femme Immigrante 2021-09-24 $258,736
61. Lift Community Services of Qathet Society 2021-09-24 $295,735
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
62. Lookout Housing and Health Society 2021-09-24 $824,766
63. Main Street Project 2021-09-24 $802,096
64. Manitoba Metis Federation 2021-09-24 $1,917,838
65. McMaster University (Michael G. DeGroote National Pain Centre)
2021-09-24 $636,973
66. Memorial University of Newfoundland and Labrador 2021-09-24 $282,840
67. Métis Nation British Columbia 2021-09-24 $374,716
68. Mi’kmaw Native Friendship Society 2021-06-16 $380,978
69. Mi’kmaw Native Friendship Society 2021-09-24 $292,440
70. Mi’kmaw Native Friendship Society 2021-09-24 $958,317
71. Midaynta Community Services 2021-09-24 $484,518
72. Native Child and Family Services of Toronto 2021-09-24 $474,272
73. Native Women's Association of Canada 2021-09-24 $534,760
74. Neighbourhood Group Community Services 2021-09-24 $1,236,700
75. Nipissing First Nation Indian Band 2021-09-24 $386,606
76. Nisga'a Ts'amiks Vancouver Society 2021-09-24 $329,316
77. Northeast Addiction and Mental Health Centre for Holistic Recovery
2021-09-24 $729,001
78. Northern Network of Peers for Equality 2021-09-24 $577,211
79. Northreach Society 2021-09-24 $1,835,450
80. Norwest Community Health Centres 2021-09-24 $2,022,250
81. Operation Come Home 2021-09-24 $359,396
82. Options Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $2,579,088
83. Ottawa Hospital Research Institute 2021-09-24 $1,254,264
84. P.E.E.R.S. Alliance Inc. 2021-09-24 $430,818
85. Pacifica Treatment Centre Society 2021-09-24 $674,828
86. Pain BC Society 2021-09-24 $522,244
87. Patient/Client & Family Council 2021-09-24 $229,636
88. Persons Living With AIDS Network of Saskatchewan Inc. 2021-09-24 $125,991
89. Peterborough AIDS Resource Network 2021-09-24 $540,342
90. PHS Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $1,149,012
91. Possibilities Recovery Center Inc. 2021-09-24 $696,441
92. St. John Ambulance 2021-09-24 $872,455
93. Providence Health Care Research Institute Trust 2021-09-24 $667,527
94. Providence Health Care Society (BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS)
2021-09-24 $2,116,854
95. Providing Advocacy Counseling and Education Society 2021-09-24 $378,266
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
96. R.E.C.A.P. Health Services Inc 2021-09-24 $678,190
97. Reach Out Chatham-Kent Missions 2021-09-24 $710,969
98. Regional Essential Access to Connected Healthcare, Niagara Inc.
2021-09-24 $1,513,594
99. Research St. Joseph's - Hamilton 2021-09-24 $1,235,383
100. Réseau ACCESS Network 2021-09-24 $751,643
101. Royal Alexandra Hospital Foundation 2021-09-24 $1,894,417
102. Royal Alexandra Hospital Foundation 2021-06-17 $1,132,197
103. Sacred Circle Indigenous Wellness Society 2021-09-24 $1,963,855
104. SafeLink Alberta Society 2021-09-24 $129,190
105. Salvus Clinic Inc. 2021-09-24 $793,163
106. Sanguen Health Centre Foundation 2021-09-24 $325,511
107. Saskatchewan Fetal Alcohol Support Network Inc. 2021-09-24 $873,750
108. Schizophrenia Society of Canada 2021-09-24 $978,000
109. Sea to Sky Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $873,039
110. Selkirk First Nation 2021-09-24 $1,749,111
111. Sexuality Education Resource Centre Manitoba Inc. 2021-09-24 $275,025
112. Sherbourne Health Centre Corporation 2021-09-24 $1,049,329
113. Simon Fraser University 2021-09-24 $592,157
114. Simon Fraser University 2021-09-24 $472,235
115. Six Nations of the Grand River 2021-09-24 $454,122
116. Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada 2021-09-24 $526,134
117. South East Grey Community Health Center 2021-09-24 $472,832
118. South Okanagan Women In Need Society 2021-09-24 $341,322
119. South Riverdale Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $472,043
120. Southeast Resource Development Council Corp. 2021-09-24 $782,201
121. Squamish Helping Hands Society 2021-09-24 $785,762
122. St. Boniface Hospital 2021-09-24 $135,000
123. St. Boniface Street Links 2021-09-24 $399,828
124. St. Paul's Foundation of Vancouver 2021-09-24 $433,416
125. St. Paul's Foundation of Vancouver 2021-09-24 $831,170
126. STC Health and Family Services Inc 2021-09-24 $3,238,943
127. Stonehenge Therapeutic Community 2021-09-24 $256,204
128. Stoney Trail Wellness Center Eden Valley 2021-09-24 $1,400,040
129. Sts’ailes 2021-09-24 $488,288
130. Students Commission of Canada 2021-09-24 $410,075
131. Sunshine House Inc. 2021-09-24 $458,065
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
132. The AIDS Network (TAN) 2021-09-24 $759,164
133. Tl'oondih Healing Society 2021-09-24 $205,361
134. Trellis HIV & Community Care (HIV/AIDS Regional Services)
2021-09-24 $1,337,264
135. Unity Health Toronto 2021-06-17 $854,439
136. Unity Health Toronto 2021-09-24 $257,452
137. University Health Network 2021-09-24 $1,658,354
138. University of British Columbia 2021-09-24 $748,328
139. University of British Columbia 2021-09-24 $1,380,237
140. University of British Columbia 2021-06-16 $443,262
141. University of Toronto 2021-09-24 $470,027
142. University of Victoria (Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research)
2021-06-17 $3,282,356
143. University of Victoria (Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research) (CAPE)
2021-06-17 $1,962,869
144. University of Western Ontario 2021-09-24 $1,995,775
145. Vasantham - A Tamil Seniors Wellness Centre Inc. 2021-09-24 $188,374
146. Wanasah - Mental Health Services for Black Youth 2021-09-24 $340,439
147. West Broadway Development Corporation 2021-09-24 $134,360
148. Wings of Power Inc. 2021-09-24 $137,537
149. Women's Hostels Inc 2021-09-24 $620,701
150. World Spine Care - Canada 2021-09-24 $580,369
151. Wyndham House Inc. 2021-09-24 $1,247,203
152. YMCA of Greater Toronto 2021-09-24 $1,325,154
TOTAL: $125,515,889
Fiscal Year 2022-2023
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
1. Alberta Community Council on HIV 2022-07-04 $4,000,000
2. Centre for Addiction and Mental Health 2022-08-08 $1,199,492
3. Coalition of Substance Users of the North Society 2022-06-02 $457,204
4. Unity Health Toronto - Providence St. Joseph’s and St. Michael’s Healthcare (St. Michael's
Hospital - Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute)
2022-10-27 $2,000,000
TOTAL: $7,656,696
Fiscal Year 2023-2024
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
1. Simon Fraser University (Canadian Drug Policy Coalition) 2023-05-05 $1,888,000
TOTAL: $1,888,000
SUAP Funding Summary – Other Levels of Government
Fiscal Year 2021-2022
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
Provincial
1. Government of Newfoundland and Labrador 2021-09-24 $1,287,605
SUBTOTAL: $1,287,605
Provincial (Health Authorities)
2. Alberta Health Services 2021-09-24 $1,146,909
3. Alberta Health Services 2021-09-24 $196,754
4. Eastern Regional Health Authority (NL) 2021-09-24 $192,572
5. Eastern Regional Health Authority (NL) 2021-09-24 $335,422
6. Fraser Health Authority 2021-09-24 $519,768
7. Fraser Health Authority 2021-09-24 $147,613
8. Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $595,175
9. Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $290,500
10. Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $293,400
11. Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $170,500
12. Provincial Health Services Authority (BC) 2021-09-24 $1,734,844
13. Saskatchewan Health Authority 2021-09-24 $1,719,392
14. Shared Health (Manitoba) 2021-09-24 $1,108,693
SUBTOTAL: $8,451,542
Territorial
15. Government of the Northwest Territories 2021-09-24 $2,981,602
16. Government of Yukon 2021-09-24 $78,693
17. Government of Yukon 2021-09-24 $361,238
SUBTOTAL: $3,421,533
Regional
18. Nunatsiavut Government 2021-09-24 $274,149
19. Four Arrows Regional Health Authority 2021-09-24 $1,539,032
20. Vancouver Coastal Health Authority 2021-09-24 $1,172,775
SUBTOTAL: $2,985,956
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
Municipal
21. City of Hamilton 2021-09-24 $287,551
22. City of Kelowna 2021-09-24 $754,438
23. City of Surrey 2021-09-24 $505,205
24. Hamlet of Pangnirtung 2021-09-24 $172,011
SUBTOTAL: $1,719,205
TOTAL: $15,154,034
Fiscal Year 2022-2023
Nil
Fiscal Year 2023-2024
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
Provincial
1. Government of Quebec N/A $58,198,973
SUBTOTAL: $58,198,973
TOTAL: $58,198,973
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO. Q-2190
BY Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake)
DATE December 13, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
QUESTION
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to meetings involving the government about safe supply, safer supply, pharmaceutical
alternatives to the toxic, illegal or illicit drug supply, pharmaceutical grade medication as an
alternative to the toxic, illegal or illicit drug supply, and medications for substance use disorder and
to provide pharmaceutical alternatives to the contaminated illegal or illicit drug supply: what are
the details of meetings over the last five years between government and pharmaceutical
companies, government and opioid manufacturers, government and lobby companies, and
government and stakeholders, including, for each, the (i) date, (ii) location, (iii) type and purpose of
the meeting, (iv) names of the organizations represented, (v) names and titles of the individuals in
attendance, including both government officials and other attendees?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Producing a comprehensive response to this question required the manual collection and analysis
of a significant volume of information. In the time allotted, and considering the broad scope of the
request, the below reflects the best and most complete information available at the time of the
search.
Date
December 8, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: stakeholder meeting
Purpose: opportunity to hear from stakeholder
Names of Organizations Represented
British Columbia Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU)
Participants
Representative from BCCSU
Carol Anne Chenard (DG)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Date
December 5,2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: opportunity to hear from stakeholder
Names of Organizations Represented
Ottawa Hospital Substance Use Program
Participants
Physician from Ottawa Hospital
Carol Anne Chenard (DG)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Date
November 29, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Presentation
Purpose: present findings from research “Safer Opioid supply: A rapid review of the evidence”
Names of Organizations Represented
Ontario Drug Policy Research Network (ODPRN)
Participants
Representatives from ODPRN
Representatives from Health Canada including Julie Hartleib (Director), and a number of managers
and analysts
Date
October 31,2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss work by BCCSU and BC Provincial Health Officer on prescribed safer supply
Names of Organizations Represented
British Columbia Centre for Substance Use (BCCSU)
Participants
Eric Costen (HC – AsDM)
Kendal Weber (HC – ADM)
Jennifer Saxe (HC – AsADM)
Dr. Theresa Tam (PHAC – Chief Public Health Officer)
Provincial Health Officer
Representatives from BCCSU
Date
October 16, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: to discuss research and evaluation of safer supply
Names of Organizations Represented
Centre on Drug Policy Evaluation (CDPE)
Participants
Representative from CDPE
Sheri Todd (DG)
Tammy Simpson (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Representative from CIHR
Date
September 18, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Update on research work, including opioid use disorder guidance, safer supply,
prevention
Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM)
Participants
Eric Costen (HC – AsDM)
Kendal Weber (HC – ADM)
Jennifer Saxe (HC – AsADM)
Representatives from CIHR
Officials from CRISM
Date
September 15, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work to create a facility to manufacture pharmaceutical
substances.
Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
Participants
Representatives from Fair Price Pharma
Participation from Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry’s Office
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Date
September 12, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To visit the site and discuss the services provided.
Names of Organizations Represented
London InterCommunity Health Centre
Participants
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Date
August 29, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Introductory meeting
Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
Participants
Representatives of Moms Stop the Harm
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Date
August 28, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Opportunity to hear from stakeholders
Names of Organizations Represented
NorWest Community Health Centres
Participants
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Stephen Lucas, Health Canada
Date
August 9,2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To learn about their SAFER (Safer Alternative for Emergency Response) program
Names of Organizations Represented
PHS Community Services Society
Participants
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Eric Costen, Health Canada
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Date
August 9, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about Hope to Health’s approach to care, including safer supply and
primary care
Names of Organizations Represented
BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
Participants
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Eric Costen
Representatives from the BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
Date
July 25, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Roundtable meeting
Purpose: To discuss their policy brief, “Innovating Beyond Exclusively Medicalized Approaches”
Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Civil Society Advancing Safe Supply Working Group
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from Health Canada
Representative from the Harm Reduction Nurses Association
Representative from Moms Stop the Harm
Representative from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Representative from Boyle Street Community Services Society
Date
July 4, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
Participants
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Date
June 13, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the Prescribed Safer Supply Emerging Evidence Brief
Names of Organizations Represented
National Safer Supply Community of Practice
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representative from Parkdale Queen West Community Health Centre
Representative from South Riverdale Community Health Centre
Representative from the London InterCommunity Health Centre
Representative from the Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research
Representative from the National Safer Supply Community of Practice
Shannon Nix, Health Canada
Local Members of Parliament
Date
June 8, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: to discuss the status of their work
Names of Organizations Represented
British Columbia Centre for Disease Control (BCCDC)
Participants
Representatives from BCCDC
Jen Saxe (DG)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Date
May 31,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Date
May 30,2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To meet with Moms Stop the Harm members visiting Ottawa
Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Representatives from Moms Stop the Harm
Date
May 18, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meetin
Purpose: Follow up meeting
Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Shannon Nix – Health Canada Associate ADM
Date
May 16,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Date
May 10, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Virtual Exchange Forum
Purpose: To discuss an “Evaluation of Harm Reduction Approaches to Address the Opioid Crisis in
the Context of COVID-19 – Safer Supply Evaluation”
Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Participants
Representatives from CIHR
Representatives from Health Canada
Researchers and safer supply service providers
Date
April 24,2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss safer supply
Names of Organizations Represented
London InterCommunity Health Centre
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from London InterCommunity Health Centre
Date
February 16, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Date
February 15,2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about Pathways to Recovery’s safer supply program
Names of Organizations Represented
Pathways to Recovery
Safer Supply Ottawa
Recovery Care
Options Bytown
Ottawa Inner City Health
Somerset West Community Health Centre
Respect Rx
Sandy Hill Community Health Centre
Ottawa Public Health
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Former President of the Treasury Board
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. ADM)
Representative from Pathways to Recovery
Representatives from Recovery Care
Representatives from Options Bytown
Representatives from Safer Supply Ottawa
Representative from Ottawa Inner City Health
Representatives from Somerset West Community Health Centre
Representative from Respect Rx
Representative from Sandy Hill Community Health Centre
Representatives from Ottawa Public Health
Date
February 10,2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss LIHC’s safer supply project
Names of Organizations Represented
London InterCommunity Health Centre
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from London InterCommunity Health Centre
Local Member of Parliament
Shannon Nix, Health Canada
Date
February 2, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss SUAP safer supply projects.
Names of Organizations Represented
Parkdale Queen West Community Health Centre
South Riverdale Community Health Centre
London InterCommunity Health Centre
National Safer Supply Community of Practice
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Local Member of Parliament
Parkdale Queen West Community Health
South Riverdale Community Health Centre
London InterCommunity Health Centre
National Safer Supply Community of Practice
Date
January 12,2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about the Tablet Injectable Opioid Agonist Therapy (TiOAT) service in
Cowichan Valley
Names of Organizations Represented
Island Health
Lookout Health and Housing Society
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
Representatives from Island Health
Representatives from Lookout Health and Housing Society
Date
January 11, 2023
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about Hope to Health’s approach to care, including safer supply and
primary care
Names of Organizations Represented
BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. ADM)
Representatives from the BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
Date
November 22, 2022
November 8, 2022
October 27,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Knowledge Exchange Series (KES) on Safer Supply
Purpose: To hear from a range of participants on the current evidence and knowledge around safer
supply, share experiences of what is or is not working well, and discuss how current research and
knowledge can be used to design new models and services while reducing risks or unintended
results from these programs.
Names of Organizations Represented
Expert Advisory Group on Safer Supply (EAG)
Federal-Provincial- Territorial Committee on Substance Use
Canadian Centre for Substance Use and Addiction (CCSA)
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions (attended Oct 27 and Nov 22)
Range of invited presenters, panellists, and participants, including researchers, safer supply
prescribers and clients, national drug policy organizations, and PWLLE
A number of observers also attended from Health Canada's Expert Advisory Group on Safer Supply,
the Federal-Provincial- Territorial Committee on Substance Use, CCSA, Indigenous Services
Canada, and the Canadian Institutes for Health Research.
Date
October 6,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up discussion
Purpose: To discuss ongoing work by the BCCSU related to models of medication distribution for
those at risk of overdose in BC.
Names of Organizations Represented
BC Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU)
Participants
Jennifer Saxe (HC-Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (HC- Director)
Sheri Todd (HC-DG)
Tammy Simpson (HC-Director)
Cesare Spadaccini (HC – Manager)
Anna Roberts (HC – Manager)
Representative from BCCSU
Date
September 14, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up meeting with pharmaceutical company
Purpose: To discuss diacetylmorphine availability in Canada
Names of Organizations Represented
Pharmascience
Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Jennifer Novak (Executive Director)
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Michele Musgrove (Manager)
Representatives from Pharmascience
Date
August 30,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Roundtable
Purpose: To discuss overdose prevention in Canada and Australia
Names of Organizations Represented
Pennington Institute
Ottawa Inner City Health
Participants
Representative from the Senate
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from the Pennington Institute
Representative from Ottawa Inner City Health
Representatives from health Canada: Shannon Nix (As ADM); Jennifer Saxe (DG); Peggy Ainslie
(Director)
Date
August 29. 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Roundtable
Purpose: Follow up to meeting on July 27, 2022.
Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
Canadian Association of People Who Use Drugs
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Representative from Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Representative from VANDU
Representative from DULF
Representative from the Harm Reduction Nurses Association
Representatives from health Canada: Shannon Nix (As ADM); Jennifer Saxe (DG); Peggy Ainslie
(Director)
Date
July 27, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Roundtable
Purpose: Follow up meeting to the Non-Medicalized Safe Supply Roundtable on March 10, 2022
Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Prairie Harm Reduction
VANDU
DULF
Harm Reduction Nurses Association
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Representative from Prairie Harm Reduction
Representatives from the Canadian Association of People
Who Use Drugs (CAPUD)
Representative from VANDU
Representative from DULF
Representative from the Harm
Reduction Nurses Association
Date
June 27,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up meeting with pharmaceutical company
Purpose: To discuss diacetylmorphine availablity in Canada
Names of Organizations Represented
Pharmascience
Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General
Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Jennifer Novak (Executive Director)
Carol Anne Chenard HC- (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Representatives from Pharmascience
Date
June 17,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up discussion
Purpose: To discuss ongoing work by the BCCSU related to models of medication distribution for
those at risk of overdose in BC.
Names of Organizations Represented
BC Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU)
Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Sheri Todd (Director General)
Tammy Simpson (Director)
Anna Roberts (Manager)
Representative from BCCSU
Date
April 19, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder Meeting
Purpose: To visit the site and discuss the services provided.
Names of Organizations Represented
London InterCommunity Health Centre
Participants
Not available
Date
April 11, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up discussion
Purpose: To discuss a request for an S. 56 exemption for a safe supply fulfillment centre and
compassion club.
Names of Organizations Represented
Drug User Liberation Front (DULF)
Vancouver Area Network of Drug Users (VANDU)
Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Anna Roberts (Manager)
Representative from DULF
Representatives from VANDU
Date
April 9, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To learn about their SAFER Initiative
Names of Organizations Represented
AVI Health and Community Services SAFER Initiative
Participants
Representatives from AVI Health and Community Services
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister )
Date
April 8, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Introductory meeting
Names of Organizations Represented
PHS Community Services Society
Participants
Representatives from PHS Community Services Society
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
Date
April 8, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
In Person
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To see a machine and hear about MySafe’s work.
Names of Organizations Represented
MySafe
Participants
Representatives from MySafe
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
Date
March 10,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Ministerial Roundtable with Moms Stop the Harm and the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Purpose: To better understand the drivers for safer supply, potential risks related to different service
provision models and which have proven to be most effective, and remaining barriers to expanding
the most effective models for safer supply.
Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Former Parliamentary Secretary to former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions Office
Representatives from Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
Date
March 2, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Webinar
Purpose: To deliver remarks at the Canadian Pharmacists Association Webinar on Safer Supply
Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Pharmacists Association
Participants
Members of the Canadian Pharmacists Association
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Date
February 23,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Ministerial Roundtable with Expert Advisory Body
Purpose: To better understand the drivers for safer supply, potential risks related to different service
provision models and which have proven to be most effective, and remaining barriers to expanding
the most effective models for safer supply.
Names of Organizations Represented
Expert Advisory Group on Safer Supply (EAG)
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Participant from the Prime Minister’s Office
Former Parliamentary Secretary to Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Representatives from the Government of British Columbia, including the Honourable Sheila
Malcolmson
Health Canada: Jennifer Saxe (Director General), Jennifer Pelley (Director), Julie Hartlieb (Director),
Sheri Todd (Director General), Ian Hodges (Manager), Saskia Vanderloo (Policy Analyst), Rachel
Joyce Hayton (Policy Analyst)
EAG members
Date
February 22,2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual Type: Meeting with pharmaceutical company
Purpose: To discuss diacetylmorphine availability in Canada
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Names of Organizations Represented
Pharmascience
Participants
Jen Saxe (Director General)
Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Jennifer Novak (Executive Director)
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Representatives from Pharmascience
Date
February 3, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Health Canada People with Lived and Living Experience (PWLLE) Council Meeting with
Minister Bennett
Purpose: For the Minister to meet the members of Health Canada’s PWLLE Council and learn more
about their priorities as outlined in a Discussion Paper, one of which is diversification of Safe
Supply.
Names of Organizations Represented
PWLLE represent themselves and not their organization as Council Members.
Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
PWLLE Council Members
Health Canada participants, including: Kendal Weber (Assistant Deputy Minister), Shannon Nix,
(As. Assistant Deputy Minister), Jennifer Novak (Executive Director), Sheri Todd (Director General),
Jennifer Saxe (Director General), Tammy Simpson (Director), Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Date
December 6, 2021
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To learn more about iOAT and work of Dr. Peter Centre
Names of Organizations Represented
Dr Peter Centre
Participants
Jennifer Saxe (HC-Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (HC- Director)
Jennifer Pelley (HC –Director)
Representatives from Dr. Peter Centre
Date
November 18, 2021
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Meeting with Canadian Pharmacist Association
Purpose: To discuss role of pharmacists in safer supply
Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Pharmacist Association (CPHA)
Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Jo-Ann Purcell (HC – Director)
Representatives from CPHA
Date
February 15, 2021
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Meeting with Stakeholder
Purpose: Introductory meeting
Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Association for Safe Supply (CASS)
Participants
Jennifer Saxe (HC - Director General)
Michelle Boudreau (HC - Director General)
Representative from CASS
Date
February 5,2021
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Webinar
Purpose: To provide an overview of the 6 national guidance documents developed by the Canadian
Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) that address the urgent needs of people who use
substances, as well as service providers and decision makers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other rapid response projects related to substance use and COVID-19 were also discussed, such
as the qualitative survey of the impact of COVID-19 on People with Living Experience of Drug Use.
Names of Organizations Represented
Representatives from a range of organizations, including:
Provinces and Territories
Federal departments and agencies
Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM)
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Participants
Representative from CRISM
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Bruna Brands (HC - Senior Science Advisor)
Representatives from provincial and territorial governments
An invitation to this webinar was extended to nearly 400 individuals and there was no record of
attendance. As such we cannot confirm the number or names of participants.
Date
January 11, 2021
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Meeting with Stakeholder
Purpose: To discuss work by the BCCSU related to models of medication distribution for those at
risk of overdose in BC.
Names of Organizations Represented
British Columbia Centre for Substance Use (BCCSU)
Participants
Eric Costen (HC – AsADM)
Jennifer Saxe (HC-Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (HC- Director)
Jennifer Novak (HC – Executive Director)
Tammy Simpson (HC-Director)
Representative from BCCSU
Date
April 26, 2021
January 20, 2022
January 26, 2022
January 31, 2022
June 16, 2022
October 18, 2022
November 4, 2022
November 11, 2022
Location (virtual/in- person)
Virtual
Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Meeting with Stakeholder
Purpose: To discuss regulatory pathways regarding diacetylmorphine
Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
Participants
Representatives from Fair Price Pharma
Representatives from Health Canada (Jennifer Saxe, Director General, Carol Anne Chenard,
Director)
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.Q-2204
BY Mr. Davies (Vancouver Kingsway)
DATE December 14, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
QUESTION
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the federal tobacco control strategy for fiscal year 2022-23: (a) what was the budget
for the strategy; (b) how much of that budget was spent within each fiscal year; (c) how much was
spent on each component of the strategy, specifically(i) mass media, (ii) policy and regulatory
development, (iii) research, (iv) surveillance, (v) enforcement, (vi) grants and contributions, (vii)
programs for Indigenous Canadians; (d) were any other activities not listed in (c) funded by the
strategy, and, if so, how much was spent on each of these activities; and (e) was part of the budget
reallocated for purposes other than tobacco control, and, if so, how much was reallocated?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada / Public Health Agency of Canada
In May 2018, the Government of Canada launched Canada’s Tobacco Strategy (CTS) with the goal of
achieving less than 5% tobacco use by 2035. The main themes of the CTS are to: help Canadians
quit tobacco; protect young people and non-tobacco users from nicotine addiction; strengthen our
foundations in science, surveillance, and partnerships; and co-develop distinctions- based
approaches with Indigenous peoples.
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) activities contribute to these
themes and comprise policy and regulatory development, compliance and enforcement, science,
research and surveillance, public education, international activities and funded and non-funded
collaborations with partners, including the provinces and territories, Indigenous organizations,
municipalities, non-governmental organizations, health care professionals and the academic
sector.
a. Health Canada and the PHAC portion of the CTS budget was $46.2M for fiscal year 2022-23.
b. $48.6M was spent by Health Canada and the PHAC within fiscal year 2022-23. Note: Surplus
from other program areas was used for additional costs incurred in 2022-23.
c. CTS expenditures by Health Canada and the PHAC for 2022-23 are as follows:
CTS 2022-23 expenditure for (c)1
(i) Mass media $0.8M
(ii) Policy and regulatory development $11M
(iii) Research $3.0M
(iv) Surveillance $3.2M
(v) Enforcement2 $6.6M
(vi) Grants and contributions $8.5M
(vii) Programs for Indigenous Canadians N/A for Health Canada -
Indigenous Services Canada and Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs to respond
1. This table includes both tobacco and vaping funds under the CTS.
2. This figure includes expenditures for both compliance and enforcement.
d. The following additional Health Canada and PHAC expenditures were funded by the strategy
incurring a total of $15.5M in 2022-23:
2022-23 additional expenditure for (d)1
(i) legal services and administrative costs including legal drafting and litigation; evaluations;
information management; administrative and financial support; and branch corporate charges
$4.9M
(ii) departmental corporate costs $5.5M
(iii) lab testing, risk assessment, and external relations $1.1M
(iv) program costs, including funding to provinces and territories to support quitline services, and
salaries associated with supporting public education and program delivery $4.0M
1. This table includes both tobacco and vaping funds under the CTS.
e. In 2022-23, no part of Health Canada or PHAC budgets was reallocated for purposes other than
tobacco control.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO. Q-2522
BY Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake)
DATE April 9, 2024
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Ms. Élisabeth Brière
QUESTION
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to funding allocated to Pathways to Recovery's Safer Supply Ottawa Program through
Health Canada's Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), since 2016: (a) what specific
measures, if any, were implemented to ensure that companies owned or operated by members of
Pathway's board of directors did not financially benefit from the funding; (b) prior to receiving the
SUAP grants, did Pathways disclose any conflicts of interest to the government, including whether
or not any of their board of directors would profit from funding provided; (c) do any of the terms
within the funding agreements include prohibitions on conflicts of interests and personal profit
from the grants, and, if so, which agreements include such terms and what are their summary; (d)
what are the details of all funding provided to Pathways, broken down by the (i) date, (ii) amount, (iii)
project description; and (e) what specific safeguards, if any, are in place to ensure that substances
provided by Pathways do not end up trafficked by drug dealers?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
a. In accordance with its terms and conditions, Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions
Program (SUAP) funding must be used by recipients solely for expenditures that are directly related
to the activities set out in the Contribution Agreement with Health Canada. These activities can
support a wide range of evidence-informed and innovative initiatives that contribute to prevention,
treatment and harm reduction responses to drug and substance use issues in Canada. Recipients
may further distribute their contribution funding to other entities to conduct approved project
activities.
b. Prior to receiving SUAP funding, Pathways to Recovery did not disclose any conflicts of interest to
the program.
c. As part of the funding requirements of their Contribution Agreement with Health Canada,
program recipients, including Pathways to Recovery, must acknowledge that third parties who are
subject to legislation and codes governing conflict of interest must comply with these obligations
and cannot derive any direct benefit resulting from their funding agreement, unless such benefit is
in compliance with the applicable legislation and codes. For example, this would include
compliance with the Conflict of Interest Act and associated values and ethics codes for individuals
who are former federal public servants.
Furthermore, SUAP funding recipients must provide to Health Canada copies of their annual
audited financial statements. Pathways to Recovery is currently meeting their reporting obligations
to Health Canada. The department has protocols in place to ensure that organizations remain in
compliance with their Contribution Agreements, and those who do not comply risk losing their
project funding.
The following clauses from the SUAP Contribution Agreement address issues related to personal
profit and conflict of interest:
4.4 Proceeds or Income
In accordance with the Reporting Plan (Appendix C), the Recipient shall report to Canada all
proceeds or other income derived from contribution funding under this Agreement (e.g., interest).
Such proceeds or income may be applied to reduce amounts otherwise payable under this
Agreement. Where Canada determines that no such reduction is possible, or that any such
reduction would only cover part of the proceeds or income derived from the use of the contribution
funds, the remainder of the proceeds or income shall constitute an overpayment and be repayable
in accordance with section 4.8 or, with the prior written approval from Canada, may be used by the
Recipient to enhance the Initiative.
19. CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The Recipient acknowledges that individuals who are subject to the provisions of the Conflict of
Interest Act (S.C. 2006, c. 9,s. 2), the Conflict of Interest Code for Members of the House of
Commons, the Conflict of Interest Code for Senators, the Conflict of Interest and Post-Employment
Code for Public Office Holders, the Values and Ethics Code for Health Canada, the Values and
Ethics Code for the Public Sector, or any other values and ethics codes applicable within provincial
or territorial governments or specific organizations, cannot derive any direct benefit resulting from
this Agreement unless the provision or receipt of such benefit is in compliance with such legislation
and codes.
d. Pathways to Recovery has been allocated a total of $9,688,420 over 57 months (July 2, 2022 to
March 31, 2025) for its Safer Supply Ottawa project, which expands upon existing Ottawa
community-based services to prescribe pharmaceutical-grade medications for those at greatest
risk of overdose and death. A breakdown of its funding by Fiscal Year, from the Contribution
Agreement, is provided below.
Pathways to Recovery SUAP Funding
FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 FY 24/25
$1,400,000 $2,181,163 $2,181,163 $1,963,047 $1,963,047
e. In response to specific allegations raised regarding the diversion of medications from federally-
funded pilot projects offering prescribed alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply, officials from
Health Canada undertook a detailed assessment of the risk mitigation measures of all federally
funded pilot projects. The results of that assessment demonstrated that projects have a range of
protocols in place. In all cases, controls and reporting requirements have been strengthened for
improved oversight and monitoring by Health Canada to help reduce diversion risk.
As a condition of their funding, Pathways to Recovery has implemented operational protocols to
help address diversion, including patient screening and monitoring, efforts to better match drugs to
patient tolerance, and witnessed dosing based on individual client risk. SUAP-funded providers,
including Pathways to Recovery, must also adhere to the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
(CDSA) and its regulations concerning the lawful import, export, production, distribution,
possession and sale of controlled substances in Canada, or risk termination of their funding
agreement.
In addition to these measures, Health Canada is engaging with a range of experts on prescribed
alternatives and diversion risk, including program providers, people with lived experience,
researchers, addictions medicine professionals, and law enforcement. Health Canada also
convened a meeting of federally-funded projects in February 2024 to review their protocols, share
the latest evidence and share promising practices.
The Government of Canada continues to support the evaluation of projects to inform our actions
moving forward, including an arms-length evaluation of prescribed alternatives pilot projects. This
study is funded through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and is being conducted
by a research team from the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). The final
results are expected in early 2025.
Health Canda continues to closely monitor prescribed alternative projects and to analyse available
evidence to inform decisions on future actions, including any further adjustments that may be
needed for the health and safety of patients and communities across Canada.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO. Q-2635
BY Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake)
DATE May 1, 2024
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Ms. Élisabeth Brière
QUESTION
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the government's safe supply, safer supply and prescribed alternatives programs,
broken down by year for the last two years:
a. which companies were allowed to import drugs into Canada that were to be used under the
programs, broken down by drug that they were allowed to import; (b) how much of each drug was
each company (i) allowed to import, (ii) importing, into Canada; and (c) what are the details of all
contracts the government has had, or currently has, with companies related to providing drugs for
the programs, including, for each, the (i) date, (ii) vendor, (iii) value of the contract, (iv) amount of
drugs provided as part of the contract, in total and broken down by substance?
RESPONSE TO FOLLOW
