Created: 2024-04-02T17:12:22.347578
Name: Let's_talk_about_acetaminophen
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/drugs-health-products/let-s-talk-about-acetaminophen.html
Package ID: d2b67acf-63e7-4348-8fba-b57bd3b6bef5
Keywords: ['acetaminophen', 'safe and effective', 'used as directed', 'a limit', 'how-much you can-take', 'the recommended dose', 'severe liver damage', 'fatal liver damage']
Notes: Acetaminophen is safe and effective when used as directed, but there is a limit to how much you can take in one day. Taking more than the recommended dose can cause severe or even fatal liver damage.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Let's talk about acetaminophen - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Publications – Health Publications – Drugs and health products Let's talk about acetaminophen Acetaminophen is widely used in Canada to treat pain and fever. More than 700 over-the-counter and prescription medicines contain acetaminophen, including medications to treat muscle pain, allergies, cold and flu, and menstrual symptoms. Acetaminophen is safe and effective when used as directed, but there is a limit to how much you can take in one day. Taking more than the recommended dose can cause severe or even fatal liver damage. There are a number of steps you can follow to take acetaminophen safely: Read the label Always read the product label carefully and follow the instructions. Know if the product contains acetaminophen. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if you have questions. Did you know: Acetaminophen is broken down by the liver? If you take too much - in one day or over several days - it can build up in your liver and become toxic. Safe use Take only one medication at a time that contains acetaminophen. Avoid taking the next dose too soon. Do not take more than the recommended amount at one time. Did you know: Prolonged use, even at the recommended dose, also increases the risk of liver problems? Download the alternative format (PDF format, 428 KB, 2 pages) Know your dose Know the amount of acetaminophen you can take at one time. Know how often you can take the product and how many hours to wait before taking another dose. Always start with the lowest recommended dose. Keep track of how much you take daily. Taking more than the recommended dose will not provide more or faster relief. If you have liver disease or drink 3 or more alcoholic drinks every day, the maximum amount you can safely take may be less than what is listed on the product label. Never take more than the maximum daily dose of 4,000 mg. (8 extra strength tablets of 500 mg tablets, or 12 regular strength tablets of 325 mg). If you take too much acetaminophen you could have liver damage and not be aware of it. Symptoms may not appear for many hours following an overdose. Call your local poison control centre immediately if you have taken more than the maximum daily dose. Did you know: Acetaminophen overdose is a leading cause of acute liver failure in Canada? Did you know: In Canada there are more than 700 hospitalizations each year for accidental overdoses involving acetaminophen? Page details Date modified: 2016-04-22 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy