Created: 2024-10-15T15:00:21.830813
Name: Health_Canada_–_Standing_Committee_on_Health_-_Minister_of_Health_Briefing_Binder_-_Supplementary_Estimates_(A)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/d3315212-fdff-47d1-9ca1-3ea841ff020a/resource/cf87de6c-328e-4b4d-9b91-67453e77e449/download/supps-a-holland-eng.pdf
Package ID: d3315212-fdff-47d1-9ca1-3ea841ff020a
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'budget', 'health']
Notes: Appearance of the Minister of Health Before HESA on the Supps A.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Standing Committee on Health
Appearance on Supplementary Estimates (A)
Minister of Health
June 17, 2024
Appearance on Supplementary Estimates (A)
Main Binder
Minister Holland
June 17, 2024
A – HOT ISSUES
1. Pharmacare and Canada’s Drug Agency
2. Dental Care
3. Healthcare Funding Agreements and Transfers
b. Quebec Issues Sheet
4. ArriveCAN
5. Primary Care
6. H5N1
7. Health Workforce Challenges
8. National Microbiology Laboratory
9. Abortion Access
10. Pandemic Agreement (formally named Pandemic Instrument)
B – OTHER ISSUES
11. Breast Implants Registry
12. Breast Screening Guidelines
13. Canada Health Act – Privatization and Compliance Issues
14. Cannabis
15. Children’s Health
16. Climate Change and Health
17. Diabetes
18. Drug and Health Product Shortages
19. Drugs for Rare Diseases
20. COVID Preparedness Posture
21. Health Data
22. Health Research
23. MAID - Mental Illness and Advance Requests
24. Marketing to Kids
25. Measles and Vaccine Hesitancy
26. Modernizing Canada’s Research System
27. Natural Health Products
28. PFAS
29. PMPRB
30. Precision Regulating
31. Rapid Tests (BTNX)
32. Recalls of Health and Consumer Products
33. Safe Long-Term Care Act/Aging with Dignity
34. Sexual and Reproductive Health
35. Smoking and Tobacco Use
C – Supplemental Material
36. Main Estimates
a. HC
b. PHAC
c. CFIA
d. CIHR
37. Personal Support Workers
PHARMACARE & CANADA’S DRUG AGENCY
ISSUE
The Government has introduced Bill C-64: An Act respecting pharmacare (Pharmacare Act), which
proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national universal pharmacare in
Canada.
On December 18, 2023, the Government of Canada announced its plan to advance with the
establishment of Canada’s Drug Agency (CDA, the Agency), built from the Canadian Agency for
Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) and in partnership with provinces and territories,
featuring an investment of $89.5 million over five years, starting in 2024-25. The CDA will provide
the dedicated leadership and coordination needed to modernize the Canadian pharmaceutical
system, laying a strong foundation to support ongoing growth. CADTH officially launched as the
CDA on May 1, 2024. The CDA is also featured in Bill C-64, an Act respecting pharmacare.
KEY FACTS
On February 29, 2024, the federal government introduced Bill C-64: An Act respecting pharmacare
(Pharmacare Act), which proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national
universal pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with
provinces and territories (PTs) to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of
contraception and diabetes medications.
On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three
years, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
On December 18, 2023 the Government of Canada announced the creation of Canada’s Drug
Agency (CDA). The CDA will be built from the existing Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH) and in partnership with provinces and territories (PTs). The Government of
Canada is investing $89.5 million over five years to establish the CDA. CADTH officially launched as
the CDA on May 1, 2024.
In Budget 2024, the Government of Canada announced $1.5 billion over five years to support the
launch of national pharmacare and coverage for contraception and diabetes medications.
KEY MESSAGES
Canadians should have access to the right medicines, regardless of where they live or their ability
to pay. People should not have to choose between paying for their medications and putting food on
the table. Unfortunately, many are still forced to make this impossible decision.
The Government of Canada introduced foundational legislation that will lay a path forward towards
the first phase of national universal pharmacare in Canada.
Provinces and territories play a critical role as our partners in ensuring Canada will move forward
towards national universal pharmacare.
Our government is already working successfully with provinces and territories on other initiatives to
help ensure Canadians can access the medicines they need, including the National Strategy for
Drugs for Rare Diseases and the Improving Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs Initiative with
Prince Edward Island.
We are pleased to report that, building on our government’s December 2023 of plans to advance
with the establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA), supported by an investment of $89.5
million over five years, the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) officially
launched as the CDA on May 1, 2024.
The CDA is featured in Bill C-64, an Act respecting pharmacare; the establishment of the CDA will
lay a strong foundation to support ongoing pharmacare priorities, such as the development of a
national formulary and a national bulk purchasing strategy.
IF PRESSED ON CONTRACEPTIVES
Contraceptive drugs were chosen as part of this next step of universal pharmacare specifically
because improved access to contraception improves equality.
Cost has consistently been identified as the single most important barrier to access to these
medications and the cost is unevenly borne by women and gender diverse Canadians.
Bill C-64 will ensure that Canadians will have access to a comprehensive suite of contraceptive
drugs and devices.
IF PRESSED ON DIABETES MEDICATIONS
Diabetes is one of the most common chronic diseases affecting people living in Canada, affecting
more than 3.7 million Canadians.
In 2015, 25% of Canadians with diabetes reported they had difficulty following their treatment due
to cost, in some cases rationing medications to save money.
Improving the affordability of these medications will improve the health of Canadians living with
diabetes and reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications such as blindness or
amputations.
The Government of Canada will be launching discussions with provinces and territories on
providing universal, single-payer coverage of diabetes drugs.
The Government of Canada also plans to establish a fund to support Canadians’ access to diabetic
supplies, such as syringes and glucose test strips.
IF PRESSED ON PHARMACARE LEGISLATION AND CDA
The Government of Canada is committed to working with stakeholders to advance the
implementation of pharmacare. The newly launched CDA will address key system gaps and lay a
strong foundation upon which future pharmacare work can be built, including formulary
development and bulk purchasing.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL FORMULARY AND BULK PURCHASING PLAN
Bill C-64 sets out next steps with the CDA on the development of a national formulary and a
national bulk purchasing strategy.
This advice would be a starting point for partners to consider which pharmaceutical products
should be included under national universal pharmacare.
The CDA is ideally placed with its expertise to develop this starting point, in collaboration with
provinces, territories, Indigenous Peoples and other partners and stakeholders.
The CDA will be expected to develop this advice no later than the first anniversary of the day on
which the Act receives royal assent.
In the meantime, we will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower
costs and improve access to the safe, high-quality medications Canadians need.
IF PRESSED ON THE PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND INITIATIVE
Progress has already been made to improve the affordability and accessibility of needed
prescription drugs for Prince Edward Island residents.
As of 2023, PEI expanded formulary access to a total of 100 new medications to treat a variety of
conditions including cancer and heart disease.
Effective June 1, 2023, PEI expanded its provincial drug coverage to reduce co-pays to $5 for almost
60% of medications regularly used by Islanders. As of March 2024, Islanders have saved over $2.8
million in out-of-pocket costs on more than 330,000 prescriptions under the $5 co-pay program.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED FOR CANADA’S DRUG AGENCY
Canada has internationally recognized pockets of excellence in pharmaceuticals management,
including the regulatory approvals process within Health Canada.
The CDA will focus on the system as a whole to address gaps, remove duplication, improve system
coordination and enhance access and equity.
More specifically, the CDA will build on CADTH’s existing functions to include the following work
streams:
Data and Analytics
Appropriate Prescribing and Use
System Coordination
Through these functions, the CDA will provide the dedicated leadership and capacity that is needed
to implement national priorities to improve the pharmaceuticals system.
The CDA will not duplicate well-performing functions or organizations.
BACKGROUND
Bill C-64: An Act respecting pharmacare
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, was introduced on February 29, 2024. The Bill proposes
foundational principles for national universal pharmacare and describes the Government’s intent
to work with provinces and territories to provide Canadians with universal single-payer first dollar
coverage for a range of contraception and diabetes products. The Bill also sets out next steps with
Canada’s Drug Agency on the development of a national formulary, a national bulk purchasing
strategy and a pan-Canadian appropriate use strategy. In addition, it requires the Minister to
establish an expert committee to provide advice on the financing and operation of universal single
payer pharmacare. The substantive provisions of the Bill, including those related to the national
formulary and the bulk purchasing strategies, expressly require that PTs be consulted.
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian introduced Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact
the Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative
framework for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada, which was defeated. On
March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don Davies
that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a dedicated fiscal transfer for
universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. On June 13, 2023, NDP MP Don Davies introduced
Private Member’s Bill C-340, An Act to Enact the Canada Pharmacare Act. This bill is similar in text
to the previously defeated Bill C-213.
Supply and Confidence Agreement
The agreement announced on March 22, 2022, committed to continuing progress towards a
national pharmacare program by passing a Canada Pharmacare Act by the end of 2023 and then
tasking Canada’s Drug Agency to develop a national formulary of essential medicines and bulk
purchasing plan by the end of the agreement (June 2025). This commitment was reflected in Budget
2022 and in language outlined within Bill C-64.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with
Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and
stakeholders through regional roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written
submissions. On June 12, 2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending
the implementation of national universal pharmacare over seven years, starting in 2020 and
achieving a comprehensive national formulary under pharmacare by 2027. This report
recommended universal, single-payer, public pharmacare in Canada through step-by-step progress
including the establishment of the Canada’s Drug Agency (CDA), implementing a National Strategy
for Drugs for Rare Diseases, and the development of a national formulary funded by pharmacare.
Under these recommendations, this formulary, developed by the CDA, will start with an initial list of
essential medicines that provinces would cover with incremental federal funding. Hoskins’
estimated that the initial net incremental public cost to cover essential medicines in 2022 would be
about $3.5 billion. In addition, the council recommends out of pocket costs for all products listed
on the national formulary not exceed $5 per prescription, with a copayment of $2 for essential
medicines, and an annual maximum of $100 per household per year to ensure that patients face
few barriers to access.
Over the subsequent five years, additional prescription drugs would be added to the national
formulary as prices and supply arrangements are negotiated with manufacturers leading to a
comprehensive national formulary available under pharmacare. Hoskins’ estimated that the
incremental public cost once national pharmacare is fully implemented in 2027 would be $15.3B.
Parliamentary Budget Officer: Cost Estimate of a Single-payer Universal Drug Plan
In response to parliamentary interest in implementing a single-payer universal drug plan, on
October 12, 2023, the Parliamentary Budget Office (PBO) released a report entitled Cost Estimate
of a Single-payer Universal Drug Plan. The report estimates that the incremental public cost to
implement single-payer universal drug plan based on Quebec’s Régie de l’assurance maladie du
Québec (RAMQ) formulary to be $11.2B in 2024-25, increasing to $13.4B in 2027-28. The RAMQ
formulary was used given that the drugs it lists represent the largest share of system-wide spending
of any PT formulary. The PBO costing is based on the framework proposed by the House of
Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) in 2016 and used by the PBO to prepare
pharmacare costing in 2017 (Federal Cost of a National Pharmacare Program). In its 2017 report,
the PBO estimated full implementation of national pharmacare in 2015-16 would have required
$7.3B in incremental public spending.
Budget Commitments (CDA)
Budget 2019 announced federal investments to move forward on three foundational elements of
national pharmacare:
Creation of Canada’s Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing effectiveness
and negotiating drug prices;
As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more consistent
coverage across the country; and,
Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to the
effective treatments they need.
Budget 2019 proposed $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition
Office to support this initiative. It also announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years,
starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases
access the drugs they need.
These commitments were reiterated in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, Budget 2021 and Budget
2022.
On December 18, 2023 the Government of Canada announced approved funding of $89.5 million
over five years, beginning in 2024-25, to establish Canada’s Drug Agency (CDA).
The Canada’s Drug Agency will be established as a not-for-profit pan-Canadian health organization,
built with, and from, the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) and in
partnership with provinces and territories. CADTH announced its transition to the CDA on May 1,
2024.
CADTH
CADTH was established in 1989 as an independent pan-Canadian health organization, governed by
a Board of Directors with representation from seven jurisdictions and non-governmental entities.
CADTH reports directly to the 13 PT Deputy Ministers of Health.
CADTH provides Canada’s health care decision-makers with objective evidence, including health
technology assessments and post-market safety and effectiveness work, support informed
decisions about the optimal use of drugs and medical devices.
CADTH’s 2022-2025 Strategic Plan has supported growth and innovation, promoting innovative
approaches and positioning the organization as a catalyst for system change. Growing capacity
underscored by the recent successful integration of the Post-Market Drug Evaluation (PMDE),
formerly situated with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
Prince Edward Island Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs Initiative
On August 11, 2021, the Government of Canada announced the signing of the first agreement with
the Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI) to inform the advancement of national universal
pharmacare. Through this agreement, PEI will receive $35 million in federal funding. The
Government of Canada will use early lessons from PEI’s efforts to inform its ongoing work to
advance national universal pharmacare.
A first drug coverage improvement was announced May 25, 2022. As of June 1, PEI has increased
formulary coverage of opioid and alcohol dependency medications to provide to residents at no
cost through its Substance Use Harm Reduction Program. In addition, PEI is strengthening
community mental health services with second generation long-acting antipsychotic medications
to the Community Mental Health program. Other improvements include changes to special
authorization requirements for 23 medications on the Pharmacare formulary that will allow greater
ease of access for physicians seeking to provide medications to Islanders. As of 2023, PEI
expanded formulary access to a total of 100 new medications to treat a variety of conditions.
Effective June 1, 2023, PEI expanded its provincial drug coverage to reduce copays to $5 for
residents covered in the Seniors Drug Program, the Family Health Benefit Program, the Generic
Drug Program and the Diabetes Drug Program. The medications identified in this list represent
about 60% of prescriptions that Islanders use on a regular basis. PEI also increased access to the
provincial High-Cost Drug Program as of June 1, 2023, making it available to all income levels, and
PEI also made adjustments to the Catastrophic Drug Program as of July 1, 2023, by lowering the
annual cap on the amount of money a household needs to spend out of pocket on eligible
medications.
External Perspectives
Media and Public Opinion
Canadians are generally supportive of improving affordable access to prescription drugs, but are
also sensitive to cost considerations as government health-related expenses continue to grow.
Mainstream media coverage of the pharmaceuticals system focuses primarily on approval of new
treatments, science-based innovation, clinical trail breakthroughs, and accessibility / affordability
of treatments from a human interest perspective.
Media reports are generally factual and link the mandate letter and related federal Budget
announcements. Select media emphasize Quebec’s unique approach to health.
A May 2022 Fraser Institute poll following the federal budget, found that 79% of Canadians support
universal national pharmacare with no costs attached. Support fell by almost half, to 40%, if the
program was to be financed by an increase in the GST.
An October 2020 Angus Reid study found that one quarter (26%) of Canadians had to pay for half or
more of their prescription drug costs in the past year. Nearly nine-in-ten Canadians supported the
idea (86%) of an affordable drugs program and more than seven-in-ten (77%) said increasing
coverage should be a high priority for government.
Stakeholders
The stakeholder ecosystem for the pharmaceuticals management system is very large and diverse,
including patients, patient organizations, Indigenous representatives, healthcare professionals,
prescribers, dispensers, scientists and researchers, employers and employees, and innovative and
generic manufacturers. Stakeholder engagement has been neutral to positive, with many signalling
willingness to discuss further collaboration.
Stakeholders want to see progress on national pharmacare, but have differing visions of the end
state. In general, patients, health care professionals, and labour organizations are supportive of a
“medicare” (public single-payer) approach, while the insurance and pharmaceutical industries
advocate a “fill the gaps” (mixed-payer) approach that would extend public coverage to those who
need it most while maintaining existing private plans. The majority of stakeholders that envision a
“medicare” approach have expressed support for Bill C-64 given the provision outlining the
Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces and territories (PTs) to provide universal,
single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and diabetes medications.
Pharmacy stakeholders have expressed concern on implementing single-payer public coverage and
how that might impact their dispensing fees as well as the potential for disruptions in their ability to
provide professional services to patients/clients who are switching from private to public coverage
for these medications.
A phased approach to implementation of coverage improvements is generally supported by all
stakeholders.
Some stakeholders, including brand name manufacturers and unions, have developed written
input to share their perspectives on the mandate and role of a CDA.
Industry emphasizes priorities such as accelerating approvals processes, support for innovation, a
data-driven approach to technology assessment, value analysis, and assessing treatment
outcomes.
Provinces and territories
Through the Council of the Federation, provincial and territorial Premiers publicly and persistently
call on the federal government to increase funding for healthcare through the Canada Health
Transfer (CHT).
Provincial and territorial governments are responsible for the delivery of health care for their
residents, including determining which drugs are covered under government-run public plans,
under what conditions this coverage is offered, and which populations are eligible for this coverage.
Bill C-64 outlines the Government of Canada’s plan to ensure universal, single-payer coverage for a
range of contraception and diabetes medications. This includes the Government of Canada’s
intention to establish a fund for diabetes devices to help support Canadians manage and monitor
their diabetes and administer their medication.
The Government of Canada will work with willing provinces and territories to implement this
coverage through bilateral agreements.
Pharmaceuticals Management Landscape
In recent years, decisions related to system management have been driven by rapidly evolving
system demands, new technologies, and evolving international market factors that have been
challenging to reconcile with the traditional division of responsibilities and the provisions of the
Canada Health Act.
This has resulted in gaps, challenges, and inefficiencies particularly in relation to:
Coordination across jurisdictions and throughout the life cycle of a drug
Data, real-world evidence, and analytical capacity
Health outcomes and appropriate use
Negotiations, pricing mechanisms and sustainability
DENTAL CARE
ISSUE
Government of Canada launch of the Canadian Dental Care Plan.
KEY FACTS
The interim Canada Dental Benefit (CDB), launched on December 1, 2022, was the first step toward
fulfilling the Government’s Budget 2022 dental care commitment. The CDB provides direct, tax-free
payments up to $650 per child under 12 years of age, and up to a maximum of $1,300 over two
years.
There are two benefit periods for the CDB. The first interim benefit period, which ran from
December 1, 2022, to June 30, 2023, helped approximately 323,000 children get brighter smiles and
healthier teeth. Applications are currently being received for the second interim benefit period,
which will run from July 1, 2023, to June 30, 2024. As of May 1, 2024, over 353,000 children have
received oral health care during this period.
The Canadian Dental Care Plan (CDCP) was formally launched in December 2023. To meet
anticipated demand and ensure a smooth process, the CDCP is being rolled out using a phased
approach, starting with seniors.
Automated phone applications were initially used for seniors aged 70 and above. This system was
decommissioned on April 30, 2024.
On May 1, 2024, applications were opened for eligible seniors 65 and older through an online
portal.
Also on May 1, 2024, Sun Life began processing digital claims, as the first million enrolled seniors
began accessing oral health care under the CDCP.
Adults between 18 and 64 with a valid Disability Tax Credit certificate and children under the age of
18 will be able to apply online as of June 2024. All remaining eligible Canadian residents between
the ages of 18 and 64 will be able to apply online in 2025.
KEY MESSAGES
Seeing an oral health professional is important for our health, but can be expensive.
One third of the people living in Canada do not have dental insurance. In 2022, one in four
Canadians reported avoiding visiting an oral health care professional because of the cost. Delaying
care can have wide-reaching impacts, including more expensive treatments and worsening health
outcomes.
The Canadian Dental Care Plan is a historic new investment – the largest social program to be
launched in generations. CDCP will help ease financial barriers to accessing oral health care for up
to 9 million Canadian residents who fall below the $90,000 adjusted family net income range and
who are uninsured.
As of May 1, 2024, one million seniors over 70 years of age were able to access the oral health care
they need. This number is growing everyday, as is the number of dedicated oral health providers
ready to care for them.
IF PRESSED ON PLAN ROLL OUT
As of May 1, the first million of enrolled seniors were able to start seeing an oral health provider. The
start date to access oral health care covered under the CDCP varies based on when the application
was received and when enrolment was completed.
Sun Life will continue to enrol up to 500,000 new members each month. By July, we expect to have
two million seniors out in their communities getting the oral health care they need. All seniors,
children under 18 years, and adults with a disability will be enrolled in 2024, with all remaining
eligible Canadian residents between the ages of 18 and 64 enroled by 2025.
IF PRESSED ON SERVICE VOLUMES
Throughout the application process, Canadian residents will be able to count on client service from
Service Canada through a dedicated call centre and/or by visiting a Service Canada Centre. Service
Canada is also working through its established community outreach network to raise awareness
and facilitate access to the CDCP with eligible populations.
As of April 30, 2024, approximately 78% of applicants chose to self-serve using the automated
Integrated Voice Recognition system. There was an average wait time of less than one minute for
those requiring assistance from a Service Canada call centre agent.
Oral health providers can confirm their participation in the CDCP by registering with Sun Life. This
number grows everyday. In July, providers who do not wish to fully participate in the CDCP will be
able to provide care on a claim by claim basis which should increase supply.
IF PRESSED ON SERVICES COVERED
The CDCP will help cover a wide range of oral health care services to improve oral health outcomes,
as recommended by an oral health provider, with flexibility to meet broad needs.
Services that will be covered under the CDCP include
preventive services,
diagnostic services,
restorative services,
endodontic services,
prosthodontic services,
periodontal services, and
oral surgery services.
IF PRESSED ON F-P/T ENGAGEMENT
The Canadian Dental Care Plan is a national program is being implemented simultaneously across
all thirteen provinces and territories. The Government of Canada has been and will continue to
engage and collaborate with all provinces and territories, and other key partners, to guarantee a
successful delivery of the Plan.
The CDCP complements existing federal, provincial and territorial oral health programs by filling
existing gaps in coverage.
Coordination of benefits ensures no duplication of coverage.
CDCP is the last payer in relation to federal social oral health programs.
CDCP is the first payer in relation to most provincial and territorial oral health programs, except in
Quebec,
In New Brunswick, Alberta and Saskatchewan, at the request of the provincial government, we will
not be coordinating benefits – patients in those provinces will qualify for one program or the other.
IF PRESSED ON THIRD PARTY CONTRACTOR
Public Services and Procurement Canada ran an open, multi-stage, competitive procurement
process to select a third-party benefits administrator. As a result, a contract was awarded to Sun
Life to act as the benefits administrator for the CDCP.
PSPC engaged the services of a third-party firm to act as an independent Fairness Monitor. The
Fairness Monitor’s duties included, but were not limited to, observing all the procurement process;
providing feedback to the Government of Canada on any potential fairness issues; and attesting to
the fairness, openness, and transparency of the entire procurement process.
IF PRESSED ON DISPLACEMENT
The Canadian Dental Care Plan is intended to help those who currently have no access to dental
coverage, not to replace current employee benefits employers offer as part of their competitive
compensation packages.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2023
Budget 2023 announced $13.1 billion over five years and $4.4 billion ongoing for the Canadian
Dental Care Plan. It also allocated $250 million over three years, starting in 2025-26, and $75
million ongoing to Health Canada to establish an Oral Health Access Fund. The fund will
complement the Canadian Dental Care Plan by investing in targeted measures to address oral
health gaps among vulnerable populations and reduce barriers to accessing care, including in rural
and remote communities. Lastly, Budget 2023 provided $23.1 million over two years, starting in
2023-24, to Statistics Canada to collect data on oral health and access to dental care in Canada.
This will inform the rollout of the Canadian Dental Care Plan.
Budget 2022 previously announced $5.3 billion over five years and $1.7 billion ongoing. A portion of
these funds were allocated to launch the Canada Dental Benefit, a direct payment totalling up to
$650 per year per child under 12 years of age. Applications for the first benefit period became
available on December 1, 2022, and the second-year applications launched on July 1, 2023.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, approximately $17.6 billion was spent
on dental services in 2021: 94% from private sector or out-of-pocket spending and 6% from public
sector spending through existing federal and provincial plans.
Results released by Statistics Canada show that, in 2022, more than one third of Canadians
reported that they had not visited a dental professional in the past 22 months. The findings also
show that just under half (49%) of Canadians in the lowest income quintile reported having seen a
dental professional in the past 12 months compared with 73% of those in the highest income
quintile.
Private dental insurance plans and government social dental programs help reduce out-of-pocket
dental expenses. However, over one third (35%) of Canadians reported not having had any dental
care expenses covered by a private or public dental insurance plan.
Provinces and territories provide coverage for medically necessary oral health services. In addition,
all provinces and territories offer some form of public dental coverage, although these programs are
generally targeted at a particular group (e.g., people with low incomes, children, or seniors) and
vary widely in coverage across the country.
The Government of Canada also provides dental coverage for public servants, members of the
Armed Forces and veterans, people incarcerated in federal correctional facilities, some
newcomers, registered First Nations people and recognized Inuit.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
ISSUE
Many Canadians face challenges in accessing health care and mental health and substance use
services. Budget 2023 outlined the federal government’s plan, “Working Together to Improve Health
Care for Canadians” to provide close to $200 billion in additional funding over ten years to
provinces and territories.
KEY FACTS
The Government of Canada is investing close to $200 billion to support the health and well-being of
Canadians, which includes $25 billion over 10 years in targeted funding to provinces and territories
to improve access to family health and mental health and substance use services, support the
health workforce and modernize health systems. This also includes $7.8 billion for bilateral
agreements in home care, mental health and long-term care.
Agreements and action plans are available online from the Government of Canada and provinces
and territories will provide annual progress updates to their residents.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government has now signed bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to begin
delivering the $25 billion in new funding available through the ten-year “Working Together to
Improve Health Care for Canadians” health care plan.
This funding builds upon a $2.4 billion federal investment over four years in mental health and
addiction services.
It will help accelerate health system improvements in four shared priorities:
access to family health services;
supporting health workers and reducing backlogs;
access to mental health and substance use services; and
modernizing health systems.
The Government has also announced agreements with 9 provinces and territories to help
Canadians age with dignity close to home with federal funding of $2.4 billion for home and
community care over four years, and $3 billion for long-term care over five years.
IF PRESSED ON AGING WITH DIGNITY AGREEMENTS
To date [May 3, 2024], Aging with Dignity agreements have been announced with nine provinces and
territories (British Columbia, Prince Edward Island, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Northwest
Territories, Nunavut, Quebec, Saskatchewan, and Yukon).
These agreements are supported by federal investments that include:
$2.4 billion over four years to improve access to home and community care from Budget 2017; and
$3 billion over five years from Budget 2021 to apply standards of care in long-term care facilities
and help support workforce stability.
IF PRESSED ON RESULTS
As part of the Working Together plan, there is a federal, provincial and territorial commitment to
improve the collection, use and sharing of health information and to inform Canadians of progress.
The Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) is leading a process, in collaboration with
provinces and territories, to refine and expand upon common indicators on shared health priorities.
Through the bilateral agreements, provinces and territories are outlining how federal funding will
support improvements, including establishing targets, timelines and commitments for annual
reporting on progress to their residents.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT FOR QUEBEC
Through the investments announced as part of the plan, Quebec will receive $38.5 billion in federal
funding over 10 years, including:
Approximately $6.7 billion for bilateral agreements: focused on the four shared health care
priorities, and home and community care, and long-term care; and
$31.8 billion through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), including $447 million through the one-
time CHT top-up, which has already been transferred.
Through tailored bilateral agreements, the government is working with provinces and territories to
deliver real results and promote greater transparency to people in Canada, including Quebec
residents.
IF PRESSED ON THE TERRITORIAL HEALTH INVESTMENT FUND
The Territorial Health Investment Fund has supported the territories in delivering health care in the
North, where each faces high costs to provide necessary care for their residents.
Territories have used funding delivered through the Territorial Health Investment Fund to develop
and implement key health system improvements in areas like collaborative care, primary care, and
health human resources.
Budget 2023 announced $350 million over ten years to renew the Territorial Health Investment
Fund, beginning in 2023-24. The government has now signed five-year agreements with all three
territories to deliver this funding.
This renewal will provide stable and predictable funding for territories to support necessary costs
they incur, including medical travel, and projects that can address the innovative delivery of health
care in a northern and remote context.
The Territorial Health Investment Fund will supplement other Government of Canada funding to
territories, including the health funding package announced on February 7, 2023.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2023 outlined the federal government’s plan to provide close to $200 billion (2023 Fall
Economic Statement estimate is now over $200 billion) over ten years in health transfers to
provinces and territories, including $46 billion in new funding through new Canada Health Transfer
measures (one-time Top-Up and Five Percent Guarantee over 5 years), tailored bilateral agreements
to meet the needs of each province and territory, funding for personal support workers, and an
increase to the Territorial Health Investment Fund. In addition, Budget 2023 announced $2 billion
over 10 years to address Indigenous health priorities and $505 million over five years, starting in
2023-24, to the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), Canada Health Infoway, and other
federal data partners.
GDP-Driven Growth: As the Canada Health Transfer’s escalator is based on GDP growth, an
additional $146.3 billion is projected to be provided over the next ten years through the Canada
Health Transfer, over and above the $45.2 billion provided in 2022-23.
Canada Health Transfer Top-Up: The $2 billion CHT top-up to address urgent pressures in
emergency rooms, operating rooms, and pediatric hospitals was transferred to provinces and
territories in June 2023. It builds on $6.5 billion in top-ups provided throughout the pandemic.
Canada Health Transfer Five Percent Guarantee: The federal government will provide top-up
payments to achieve Canada Health Transfer increases of at least five percent per year for the next
five years. The last top-up payment will be rolled into the Canada Health Transfer base at the end of
the five-year period, resulting in a permanent funding increase. This represents an estimated $17.5
billion over ten years in additional funding through the Canada Health Transfer.
Tailored Bilateral Agreements: The federal government will provide $25 billion over ten years
through a new set of bilateral agreements to address individual provincial and territorial health
system needs, such as expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and
reducing backlogs, increasing mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health
systems.
Bilateral agreements on Working Together, signed in 2023-24, include the initial three-year
allocation of the $25 billion in new funding to provinces and territories, as well as the next three
years of funding from the remaining $2.4 billion for mental health and addictions from Budget 2017
supported by the 2017 Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
The Government of Canada is also collaborating with provinces and territories on bilateral
agreements on the shared priority of helping Canadians age with dignity close to home. These
agreements include the remaining $2.4 billion over four years to improve access to home and
community care from Budget 2017, and the $3 billion over five years from Budget 2021 to apply
standards of care in long-term care facilities and help support workforce stability. A further $1.7
billion in federal funding is also committed to support wage increases for personal support workers
and related professions.
Bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible and provinces and territories have options to tailor
their respective Action Plans in response to the unique needs of their populations and geography.
The Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians Plan identifies an initial set of 8
common indicators based on shared health priorities. On August 2, 2023, CIHI released an initial
snapshot of these indicators on their website.
CIHI is leading a collaborative process to review and report annual progress on these common
indicators. In addition, CIHI is working with federal, provincial and territorial governments and data
partners to identify a broader list of new indicators, including new Indigenous health indicators.
This work will also seek to improve the availability of indicator data that can be sorted by population
characteristics.
Personal Support Worker Wage Support: The federal government will provide $1.7 billion over five
years to support hourly wage increases for personal support workers and related professions.
Territorial Health Investment Fund: The federal government is providing $350 million over ten years
in recognition of medical travel and the higher cost of delivering health care in the territories. This
represents $35 million per year, an increase from the previous $27 million.
Indigenous Health Equity Fund: The federal government is working with Indigenous partners to
provide additional support for Indigenous health priorities by providing $2 billion over ten years,
which will be distributed on a distinctions basis through the Indigenous Health Equity Fund.
ISSUE SHEET – QUEBEC (QC)-RELATED ISSUES
BILATERAL HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENT
Issue and Current Status
All provinces and territories, including QC, signed bilateral agreements by the March 31, 2024
deadline, enabling them to access funding under the Working Together to Improve Health Care for
Canadians plan.
All provinces and territories, including QC, signed bilateral agreements by the March 31, 2024
deadline, enabling them to access funding under the Working Together to Improve Health Care for
Canadians plan.
A total of 26 agreements were signed (two per jurisdiction – Working Together and Aging with
Dignity)
Background
The Government of Canada committed to flexible and tailored bilateral agreements, so that
provinces and territories, including QC, can address the unique needs of their populations, and
report on progress to their residents.
QC is eligible to receive an estimated $6.7 billion over 10 years through the Working Together and
Aging with Dignity agreements.
Through the Canada-Quebec Agreement on Federal Funding to Support Quebec’s Health Priorities
(2023-24 to 2026-27), QC is receiving $2.5 billion over 4 years to improve access to family health
teams, reduce surgical and diagnostic backlogs, accelerate digital health, and strengthen mental
health and social services.
Through the Canada-Quebec Agreement on Federal Funding to Support Home and Community
Care and Long-term Care (2023-24 to 2027-28), QC is receiving ~$1.2 billion over 5 years to improve
access to home and community care, and improve safety and quality of life for LTC residents.
The Government of Canada committed to flexible and tailored bilateral agreements, so that
provinces and territories, including QC, can address the unique needs of their populations, and
report on progress to their residents.
Responsive Lines
As planned, bilateral agreements were signed with every province and territory fiscal year 2023-24
and are providing all provinces and territories with the resources needed to support health care
improvements.
Like other provinces and territories, QC has developed plans outlining how federal funds will help
advance the shared priorities outlined in the Working Together to Improve Health Care for
Canadians plan.
We will continue to work with provinces and territories on the implementation of these agreements,
including the public reporting of progress and improvements.
PHARMACARE AND DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Issue and Current Status
On March 22, 2023, the federal government announced the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases (the National Strategy). On February 29, 2024, the federal government introduced Bill C-
64, An Act respecting pharmacare (Pharmacare Act).
In Budget 2024, the Government of Canada announced $1.5 billion over 5 years to support the
launch of national pharmacare and coverage for contraception and diabetes medications.
QC has publicly stated its position that it will seek to opt out from any national strategy related to
pharmacare with full compensation and without conditions.
Background
The National Strategy was announced on March 22, 2023. It aims to increase access to, and
affordability of, effective drugs for rare diseases to improve the health of patients across Canada,
including children.
As part of the overall investment under the National Strategy, the Government of Canada will make
available up to $1.4 billion to provinces and territories over the next three years through bilateral
agreements. This funding will help provinces and territories improve access to new and emerging
drugs and support enhanced access to existing drugs, early diagnosis, and rare diseases screening.
Health Canada and PT officials (QC as an observer) have been making progress in discussions to
finalize a framework for bilateral agreements.
QC announced a policy on rare diseases in 2022, and a four-year action plan and associated
funding of $17.2 million in spring 2023.
Bill C-64, the Pharmacare Act, proposes foundational principles for the first phase of national
universal pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with
provinces and territories to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception
and diabetes medications.
As outlined in Bill C-64, there is a commitment to maintaining long-term funding for the provinces,
territories, and Indigenous peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products.
QC has indicated its desire to opt out unconditionally, with full financial compensation, from the
National Strategy as well as any national pharmacare plan.
Responsive Lines
The federal government understands QC has its own public drug plan and the integral role that the
Institut national d'excellence en santé et services sociaux (INESSS) plays in the appropriate use
and evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of medicines.
The Government of Canada welcomes future conversations with QC, and all provinces and
territories, on the topic of national pharmacare.
The Government of Canada also welcomes discussions with QC, and all provinces and territories,
about building on existing efforts and delivering the benefits of the National Strategy for Drugs for
Rare Diseases for all patients with rare diseases, including those living in QC.
When it comes to affordable access to medications, all patients, including those residing in QC,
can benefit from collaboration.
DENTAL CARE
Issue and Current Status
The phased rollout of the Canadian Dental Care Plan (CDCP) is underway in all jurisdictions,
including QC.
More than 1.8M seniors aged 70 and older have applied and are deemed eligible for CDCP, with
more than 500K in QC.
As of May 1, the first one million eligible applicants across Canada can now access coverage under
the CDCP. The next 500,000 eligible applicants will have access to coverage starting on June 1, and
more will be added each month.
Seniors aged 65 years and older are now able to apply to the CDCP using the online application.
Children under 18 and adults with a valid disability tax credit certificate will be able to use the
online application to apply for enrolment beginning in June.
QC has requested to opt out of the CDCP, pending negotiations on the terms. Health Canada is
continuing to engage with QC at the Deputy Minister level to promote short-term cooperation as the
CDCP is rolled out, while being open to discussions regarding opt-out over the longer term.
Background
The CDCP aims to help ease financial barriers to accessing oral health care services and provide
coverage for eligible Canadian residents without access to dental insurance. It is intended to
complement existing PT dental programs and fill gaps in coverage for those programs.
The CDCP continues to be rolled out across Canada, including in QC, and is administered with the
support of the contracted service provider, Sun Life.
Prior to the launch of the CDCP, all provinces and territories were provided with the opportunity to
opt out of federal delivery with compensation, providing they implement a comparable plan and
meet certain terms and conditions. QC requested to opt out but rejected these terms.
The QC Assemblée nationale has voted unanimously for QC to opt out with full compensation with
no conditions. QC’s Budget 2024-25 also cites opting out of the CDCP with full compensation as a
measure to help balance the QC budget, indicating that the province intends to use funds from any
opt-out to offset its existing expenditures on QC dental programs.
Responsive Lines
The CDCP is being rolled out in all thirteen jurisdictions simultaneously and we are committed to
working with provinces and territories and oral health care professionals to ensure that Canadians
continue to have access to affordable, accessible, and essential oral health care.
The Government of Canada wants to ensure that Quebecers, like other Canadians, are able to
benefit from increased access to oral health care to the greatest extent possible, starting with
seniors this month.
Health Canada continues its dialogue with QC to ensure equal access to dental care for Quebecers
aimed not only at improving their oral health, but their overall health too.
CANADA HEALTH ACT
Issue and Current Status
QC historically has not recognized the CHA or the federal government’s authority under the Act. QC
remains committed to its position that health care falls exclusively under provincial jurisdiction.
Deductions from QC’s Canada Health Transfer were levied in March 2023 ($41,867,224) and in
March 2024 ($36,014,132) for patient charges for medically necessary diagnostic services at private
clinics, which are not permitted under the CHA’s Diagnostic Services Policy.
Recognizing the province has taken some action to improve access to publicly insured diagnostic
services, a partial reimbursement to QC was also recently made (March 2024) for these deductions
($46,728,814). QC could be eligible for additional reimbursement if it takes further action to
eliminate patient charges. Health Canada continues to engage with the province to encourage
them to do so.
Background
Following Health Canada engagement with QC, the province provided the Department with
information on how Bill 15 and contracting out with private clinics, including diagnostic clinics, will
help improve access to publicly insured health services. This information fulfilled the requirement
for a Reimbursement Action Plan under the CHA’s Reimbursement Policy. The province was
informed that, in light of progress made to eliminate patient charges, they were eligible for a partial
reimbursement (60%) of their March 2023 and March 2024 deductions.
On March 11, QC officials were notified by Finance Canada of deduction ($36,014,132) and
reimbursement ($46,728,814) amounts, which were subsequently applied to the March 18 and
March 20 Canada Health Transfers to the province. QC was also informed further reimbursement
could be possible if it took additional actions to eliminate patient charges.
Responsive Lines
I am pleased that QC has made strides to increase public access to needed care, including
diagnostic services, which helps protect patients from being charged for these services.
Due to the efforts made by QC to improve access to publicly funded diagnostic services, Health
Canada made a partial reimbursement of the province’s March 2023 and March 2024 deductions
under the CHA’s Reimbursement Policy, totalling more than $46 million.
The objective of the CHA is not to levy penalties but to ensure patients do not have pay to access
medically required care. Health Canada continues to work with QC to encourage them to eliminate
patient charges for medically necessary services, which would allow the province to be reimbursed
for the remainder of its March 2023 and 2024 deductions.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)
Issue and Current Status
In June 2023, the QC National Assembly passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting end-of-
life care and other legislative provisions which created a provincial regime to permit advance
requests for MAID (to come into force on a date set by the provincial government that can be no
later than June 7, 2025).
QC has requested the federal government explore options to remove legal barriers and permit
implementation of its advance request regime – most recently through a QC National Assembly
motion passed in February 2024 requesting the federal Parliament amend the Criminal Code.
Background
The Criminal Code does not permit MAID based on an advance request because it requires that a
person be experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering and be able to provide consent
immediately before MAID is provided, with limited exception. With an advance request, a person
would make a request for MAID before they are experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering, and
receive MAID after they have lost capacity to consent.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) reviewed advance requests as one of several topics
addressed in its report tabled in February 2023. AMAD recommended that the Government of
Canada amend the Criminal Code to allow for advance requests following a diagnosis of a serious
and incurable medical condition, disease, or disorder leading to incapacity. The federal
government’s response to the report notes further consultation and study is required; no
commitments are made to expanding federal legislation.
Responsive Lines
We are aware there is strong support among the public for advance requests, particularly for
persons diagnosed with capacity-limiting diseases like Alzheimer’s. However, we have also heard
that practitioners place a great deal of value on obtaining a “final consent” as confirmation of a
person’s wishes.
Amending the Criminal Code to permit advance requests would be a complex undertaking and first
require a great deal of consultation and study with provinces and territories, experts, and health
care stakeholders.
The Government of Canada remains open to discussing the issue of advance requests with
provinces and territories.
ARRIVECAN
ISSUE
ArriveCAN was launched in April 2020 to support the digital submission of mandatory public health
information required from travellers coming into Canada. ArriveCAN repeatedly evolved in lockstep
with the Emergency Orders in Council implementing public health measures at the border to
protect Canadians, limit importation and spread of COVID, limit pressures on the Canadian health
care system and to eventually support resumption of commercial travel.
The Office of the Auditor General (OAG) tabled an audit report on February 12, 2024, which
examined the management of procurement and expected deliverables of the ArriveCAN application
with due regard for value for money. The OAG concluded that overall, the Canada Border Services
Agency, the Public Health Agency of Canada, and Public Services and Procurement Canada
repeatedly failed to follow good management practices in the contracting, development, and
implementation of the ArriveCAN application. One recommendation implicated the Public Health
Agency of Canada.
KEY FACTS
Using the information that was available, the OAG estimated the cost of the application to be
approximately $59.5 million.
Overall, there were a total of 83 different Emergency Orders in Council issued to respond to the
evolving pandemic. From the time ArriveCAN was launched in April 2020 until the health
requirements were lifted in October 2022, a total of 177 versions of the application were released,
of which 25 were considered major releases.
ArriveCAN was used for more than 60 million digital submissions.
In her December 2021 Report 15, Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders—Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the report tabled on February 12, 2024, the Auditor General
highlighted the utility of ArriveCAN with respect to improving the timeliness and quality of data
received at the borders.
ArriveCAN facilitated the safe resumption of international travel, which saw an increase of
approximately 1,000 air arrivals per day in April 2020 to 50,000 air arrivals per day in April 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada took a comprehensive, layered
approach to border management informed by available data, operational considerations, scientific
evidence, and monitoring of the epidemiological situation and pandemic response capacity.
ArriveCAN was the tool that enabled the Government of Canada to implement, adjust and remove
important public health measures at the border, as the pandemic evolved.
Reliable, timely and relevant data was crucial at the time to inform policy and decision-making in
public health emergencies.
The Public Health Agency of Canada accepts the Auditor General’s recommendation.
IF PRESSED ON THE FINDINGS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT
The Agency is strengthening existing guidance, supporting tools and training to address the
recommendation to document interactions and the reasons for decisions made during non-
competitive procurement processes.
The recommendation also calls for a process to ensure compliance with contracting policies.
PHAC is updating its quality assurance protocols to ensure that these requirements are met.
The findings also point to the importance of formally documenting roles and responsibilities at the
outset of a project, rather than at a later stage. This is being incorporated into the Agency’s
preparedness and contingency plans for future emergencies.
IF PRESSED ON THE FINDINGS IN THE PRIVACY COMMISSIONER’S SPECIAL REPORT
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada’s investigation on ArriveCAN, found that the
Public Health Agency of Canada and the Canada Border Services Agency acted in accordance with
the Privacy Act with regard to the collection, use, disclosure, and retention of personal information.
Throughout the pandemic, the Public Health Agency of Canada consulted its internal privacy
experts to ensure that the Government of Canada’s use of data followed best practices.
Overall, the collection of personal information under the Emergency Orders by both agencies was
determined to be necessary and proportional.
IF PRESSED ABOUT TRAVELLERS ERRONEOUSLY SENT TO QUARANTINE DUE TO A GLITCH WITH
ARRIVECAN
At the time of the event, PHAC worked closely with CBSA to make sure all affected travellers were
contacted and informed of the error and advised that they were not required to quarantine.
PHAC also worked with Service Canada, who managed the ArriveCAN help line for travellers, to
inform any travellers who called with questions.
No traveller was sent to a Designated Quarantine Facilities because of this system error.
IF PRESSED ON CONTRACTS
PHAC did not contract with any company or vendor for the development, maintenance, testing, or
operations of the ArriveCAN technology.
PHAC contracted with KPMG to provide professional expertise to understand and analyze the
processes and impacts of public health policies on travellers.
BACKGROUND
To support the administration and enforcement of the Quarantine Act and Emergency Orders made
under it, CBSA and PHAC developed ArriveCAN, an integrated digital solution that enables real-
time collection of information at Canadian Ports of Entry (POE) for all incoming travellers.
ArriveCAN enabled travellers to provide their information digitally as required by the Emergency
Orders made under the Quarantine Act, to support compliance,enforcement and public health
measures.
ArriveCAN first launched in April 2020 and is available as a mobile app on the Apple App and
Google Play stores or by signing in online at Canada.ca/ArriveCAN.
Implementation of ArriveCAN
In February 2020, Canada began collecting mandatory information from travellers who had been in
specific geographical locations in the previous two weeks, such as Hubei province in China, Italy
and Iran. Travellers submitted this information via the Coronavirus Form.
The Coronavirus Form was modified to become the Traveller Contact Information Form to support
the first Mandatory Isolation Order in late March 2020. The form was made available digitally via a
website in March 2020.
Due to the volume of travellers entering Canada, the paper forms quickly became operationally
inefficient and resulted in inaccurate or incomplete submissions and lengthy digitization
processing that led to delays in sharing the information with the provinces and territories. It also
resulted in traveller line-ups at airports and border crossings -- raising concerns about increasing
the risk for spreading the virus in those areas -- and made it difficult to fully administer the border
measures and ensure essential travel and transit of people and goods.
ArriveCAN was launched in April 2020 as a joint initiative between the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) and the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) to allow travellers to voluntarily
provide their public health information. Later, to further support the implementation of the
emergency border measures, the use of ArriveCAN became mandatory for air travellers in
November 2020, and later for travellers by land and marine. The app and sign-in online platform
reduced points of contact at POEs, improved processing times at the border and reduced crowding,
and allowed for faster sharing of information with provinces and territories.
Mandatory Digital Submission
ArriveCAN stopped being mandatory as of October 1, 2022.
Submission of traveller information using ArriveCAN was initially voluntary. However, on November
21, 2020, it became mandatory for air travellers to submit their information digitally in advance of
arriving in Canada (i.e., before boarding the aircraft to Canada). At the time, travellers entering
Canada by air accounted for approximately 20% of all travel. As of February 22, 2021, it became
mandatory for travellers entering via land to submit their information through ArriveCAN prior to
arriving at the border crossing. Travellers entering Canada by land accounted for approximately
78% of total travel.
Travellers were not denied boarding their aircraft for failing to comply with the digital requirements;
however, they faced potential enforcement actions upon entry ranging from a verbal warning to a
$5,000 fine.
Once in Canada, it was mandatory for non-exempt travellers from all modes (air, land, marine) to
provide information digitally, including daily symptom self-assessments, throughout their 14-day
quarantine, and confirm that they have reached their place of quarantine through ArriveCAN or the
toll-free number.
Although exempt travellers were mandated to provide contact information in advance if travelling by
air or land, they were exempt from post-border reporting as they were exempt from the mandatory
isolation order. Approximately 75% of travellers were exempt from the mandatory requirement to
quarantine, including travellers who entered Canada for the purpose of performing cross-border
work, medical support, essential services, or trade or transport.
During the period when the mandatory requirements were in effect, usage of ArriveCAN for air
travellers was consistently at or above 85% and above 80% for land travellers since January 2022.
Information provided through ArriveCAN was shared with provinces and territories and law
enforcement agencies for public health follow-up and to verify compliance with the Quarantine Act.
ArriveCAN was part of a broader suite of activities and tools supporting Canada’s evolving border
policies throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to explore how digital tools can further support
Canada’s public health data needs.
Privacy Commissioner’s Report
In the first months of 2022, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner (OPC) received several privacy
complaints about the collection and use of traveller data via the ArriveCAN app and website. The
Privacy Commissioner’s Special Report, tabled in Parliament on May 30, 2023, indicates that these
complaints were not well-founded.
In particular, the collection, use, disclosure, retention, and disposal of information by CBSA and
PHAC for the purposes of administering and enforcing the Emergency Orders was compliant with
the Privacy Act.
Contracts
PHAC contracted with KPMG to provide professional expertise to understand and analyze the
processes and impacts of public health policies on travellers, including through: developing
process maps; identifying and describing stakeholders to support their engagement; and
performing jurisdictional scans.
FAMILY HEALTH TEAMS
ISSUE
Far too many Canadians are still struggling to secure timely access to family health service,
whether from a doctor, nurse, or team of providers. This issue disproportionality impacts those
living in rural communities.
Recently, media reports and experts have been framing the lack of timely access to family health
services as a crisis, with repercussions for the broader health care system.
KEY FACTS
In 2022, 14% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked a regular health care provider.
In 2021, 17.8% of Canadians lived in rural communities, but they were served (in 2022) by 12.8% of
family medicine physicians practicing in Canada.
In 2017-2020, 20.3% of First Nations people living off reserve, 17.9% of Métis, and 56.5% of Inuit
across Canada reported being without a regular health care provider.
Access to family health services is a shared health priority identified in the Government’s plan for
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada recognizes that far too many Canadians lack timely access to a regular
family health services provider.
Budget 2023’s historic announcement includes close to $200 billion over 10 years for health care,
including $25 billion over ten years to support provinces and territories through bilateral
agreements.
Improving access to family health services is at the core of these bilateral agreements.
Transforming the delivery of those services, including through team-based care, will help
Canadians get care when and where they need it, from a team, doctor or nurse practitioner.
IF PRESSED ON HOW FEDERAL INVESTMENTS ARE ENHANCING ACCESS TO FAMILY HEALTH
SERVICES
Transforming how family health services are delivered will improve access to care, better support
our health workers and better support the health system as it adapts to the changing needs of
Canadians.
Team-based care can play a key role in expanding access to family health services in that it is
centered on the patient, who can get the services they need from a range of health providers, when
and where they need them.
The historic investments announced in Budget 2023 support the provinces and territories in their
efforts to transform family health services.
IF PRESSED ON THE NUMBER OF CANADIANS WITHOUT A FAMILY HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDER
Our government recognizes that Canadians continue to face challenges in accessing a regular
health care provider, be that a doctor, nurse practitioner, or team of health care professionals.
According to Statistics Canada, in 2022, approximately 14% of Canadians did not have access to a
regular health care provider.
As part of the Working Together plan, there is a federal, provincial and territorial commitment to
collect, use and share health information and to inform Canadians of progress with key common
indicators.
The Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) is leading a process to review and refine eight
initial common indicators, including one related to measuring access to family health services.
CIHI released an initial snapshot of indicators for the four shared health priorities in August 2023
drawing from available data. CIHI relied on the 2021 Statistics Canada data for the family health
services indicator, but due to differences in calculations, the CIHI report indicates that
approximately 12% of Canadians do not have a regular health care provider.
CIHI and Statistics Canada are currently working together to refine these indicators.
IF PRESSED ON INVESTMENTS IN FAMILY HEALTH SERVICES WITHIN PROVINCIAL AND
TERRITORIAL ACTION PLANS
The government of Canada has now signed bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories
under the Working Together plan, and we are encouraged by the strong collaboration that is driving
progress in access to care.
These agreements are flexible, and provinces and territories have tailored them to address the
unique needs of their populations and geography.
Through these agreements federal funds are being used to strengthen family health services, for
example:
Alberta is expanding team-based care and enhancing virtual care to increase access to family
health services.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES, INCLUDING SHORTAGES BEING FELT
ACROSS THE COUNTRY
Our government recognizes that health human resource shortages are creating challenges for all
Canadians to get timely access to family health services.
Budget 2024 proposes to provide $77.1 million over four years, starting in 2025-26, to address
critical health human resource supply challenges.
This funding will support the integration of IEHPs into Canada’s health workforce by reducing
barriers and addressing critical gaps in training opportunities.
Funding will create 120 medical residency training positions, increase capacity to support
accelerated licensure processes and get IEHPs working more quickly and provide support to help
IEHPs navigate credential recognition systems.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
In response to the pandemic, the Government worked with provinces and territories to accelerate
uptake and use of virtual care, supported by $200M in funding in 2020.
Since then, virtual care has become an important way for Canadians, including those in rural and
remote communities, to get the care they need, when they need it.
The historic investments announced in Budget 2023 will enable provinces and territories to
transform the way family health services are delivered, including through virtual care, in ways that
make sense in their respective contexts.
BACKGROUND
Family Health Services
Family health services are the backbone of high-performing health care systems. They serve a dual
function in the health care system as the direct provision of first-contact services and a
coordination function to ensure continuity across health care settings. However, Canadians
continue to struggle to access family health services. In 2022, 14% of Canadians 12 years and over
lacked a regular health care provider, with gaps felt particularly acutely by Indigenous populations.
In 2021, 17.8% of Canadians lived in rural communities, but they were served (in 2022) by 12.8% of
family medicine physicians practicing in Canada. In 2017-2020, 20.3% of First Nations people living
off-reserve, 17.9% of Métis, and 56.5% of Inuit across Canada reported being without a regular
health care provider. Recently, media reports and experts have been framing the lack of timely
access to family health services as a crisis, with repercussions for the broader health care system.
It is well recognized that multidisciplinary team-based care is critical to increasing timely access to
care for patients. Team-based approaches, with optimized scope of practice, create efficiencies
that can allow primary care providers to add new patients to their panel thereby increasing
provider-patient attachment, and improving timely access to care. Team-based models of care can
improve quality of life, well-being and satisfaction for providers resulting in improvements to
retention and recruitment. Team-based models also offer the potential to enhance access to
services that have traditionally not been well integrated with primary care, such as mental health
and substance use and addiction services, as well as with the broader social services sector.
Virtual Care
Virtual care is increasingly recognized as an important component of high-quality care and can help
support access to family health services, particularly in northern, rural and remote communities.
The adoption of virtual care accelerated as a health system response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In
2020, in response to the pandemic, the Government collaborated with provinces and territories to
accelerate uptake and use of virtual care, supported by $200M in funding in 2020. $150M of this
funding was provided to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements to enhance virtual
services and $50 million went to Canada Health Infoway to support provinces and territories to
implement virtual care.
Federal Investments
Budget 2023 outlines the federal government’s plan to provide close to $200 billion over ten years in
health transfers to provinces and territories, including $46.2 billion in new funding through new
Canada Health Transfer measures, tailored bilateral agreements to meet the needs of each
province and territory, funding for personal support workers, and an increase to the Territorial
Health Investment Fund. In addition, Budget 2023 announced $2 billion over 10 years to address
Indigenous health priorities and $505 million over five years, starting in 2023-24, to the Canadian
Institute for Health Information (CIHI), Canada Health Infoway, and other federal data partners.
Canada Health Transfer Five Percent Guarantee: The federal government will provide top-up
payments to achieve Canada Health Transfer increases of at least five percent per year for the next
five years. The last top-up payment will be rolled into the Canada Health Transfer base at the end of
the five-year period, resulting in a permanent funding increase. This represents an estimated $17.1
billion over ten years in additional funding through the Canada Health Transfer.
Tailored Bilateral Agreements: The federal government will provide $25 billion over ten years
through a new set of bilateral agreements to address individual provincial and territorial health
system needs, such as expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and
reducing backlogs, increasing mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health
systems through standardized health data and digital tools.
Bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible and provinces and territories have options to tailor
their respective Action Plans in response to the unique needs of their populations and geography.
The Government has now signed bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories.
Agreements and action plans are available online from the Government of Canada and provinces
and territories will provide annual progress updates to their residents.
HHR and FPT Collaboration
Budget 2024 proposes to provide $77.1 million over four years, starting in 2025-26, to address
critical health human resource supply challenges. This funding will support the integration of IEHPs
into Canada’s health workforce by reducing barriers and addressing critical gaps in training
opportunities. Funding will create 120 medical residency training positions, increase capacity to
support accelerated licensure processes and get IEHPs working more quickly and provide support
to help IEHPs navigate credential recognition systems.
On October 12, 2023, FPT Ministers of Health issued a public statement reaffirming their
commitment to supporting Canada’s health workforce so our health workers are able to provide
high-quality, accessible, and effective health services for people living in Canada. In particular, FPT
governments committed to concrete actions focusing on:
Retention, reducing rates of stress and burnout and improving workplace culture, flexibility, and
wellness so health workers can stay in their jobs;
Domestic education supply and demand, enhancing Canada’s capacity to produce a domestic
supply of key health professionals, including more training opportunities for Indigenous Peoples
that meets national demand for care and keeps pace with a growing and aging population;
Foreign credential recognition and ethical recruitment, making Canada a country of choice for
health care providers by reducing the time it takes for internationally educated health professionals
(IEHPs) to join our workforce;
Labour mobility, supporting an agile and flexible workforce to support access to care; and
Health workforce data and planning, improving the availability, sharing and standardization of
health workforce data to support health workforce planning.
On November 1, 2022, the Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health
Workers. The Coalition’s efforts are focused on identifying approaches to drive pan-Canadian
action and progress on policy implementation, informed by real world perspectives. The Coalition
is comprised of representatives from key groups, including nurses, doctors, personal support
workers, colleges and universities, patients, and equity-seeking communities, and reports to the
Deputy Minister of Health.
Digital Health and Health Data
Digital health tools and health data play an important role in facilitating integrated care, enabling
team-based care, and providing patient access to personal health information. Yet, digital systems
across the country are highly fragmented leading to a poor ability to collect, share, and use health
data. The implications for primary care are significant, given its central role in enabling the
coordination and integration of care across the entire health care continuum.
For example, according to CIHI’s snapshot report published in August 2023, in 2021, less than 2 out
of 5 (37%) Canadian doctors (not including Quebec) reported sending patient information
electronically to other doctors involved in their patients’ care. Recent Canadian research shows
that Canadians want digital access to their entire health record and want their primary care
provider to have this complete access as well.
Through the federal Government’s Working Together plan, provinces and territories will be able to
invest in and build a world-class health data system, which will help:
Canadians access their own electronic health information and make sure it can be shared between
health professionals and across health settings, allowing patients and health care providers to work
together more effectively;
Clinicians have the information they need to make the right decisions with their patients; and,
Governments make informed decisions for the overall improvement of Canada’s health care
system and better prepare and manage for public health events, ultimately benefitting all
Canadians.
HIGHLY PATHOGENIC AVIAN INFLUENZA A(H5N1) IN DAIRY CATTLE IN THE UNITED STATES
ISSUE
On March 25, 2024, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) was notified by the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) of the detection of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI)
A(H5N1) in dairy cattle in Kansas and Texas.
On April 1st, 2024, the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) confirmed that an individual in Texas
tested positive for HPAI A(H5N1) and had exposure to dairy cattle presumed to be infected with
HPAI A(H5N1). This likely represents the first mammal-to-human transmission.
On May 22, 2024, the CDC confirmed a second human case associated with the current outbreak
in a Michigan farmworker who had regular exposure to dairy cattle infected with HPAI A(H5N1).
CFIA has not detected HPAI A(H5N1) in cattle or other livestock in Canada, and there have been no
human cases in Canada associated with the current global HPAI A(H5N1) outbreak.
Based on current scientific evidence, PHAC’s updated risk assessment states that the risk of avian
influenza infection to the general public continues to be very low.
KEY FACTS
Initial Discovery
The outbreak was discovered through an investigation by the USDA, US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), and US CDC into an illness primarily affecting dairy cows in several states in
March 2024.
The detection of dead wild birds and cats on affected premises prompted testing for HPAI A(H5N1)
after other more common illnesses in dairy cattle were ruled out. Initially, unpasteurized samples of
milk collected from two dairy farms in Kansas and one in Texas, as well as a throat swab from a cow
on another dairy farm in Texas, tested positive for HPAI A(H5N1). Further testing was pursued in
other herds based on clinical presentation and connection to states with infected herds.
Human Health Risk (US)
The first confirmed human case of A(H5N1) related to the outbreak in dairy cattle was a dairy
worker in Texas who developed mild symptoms and recovered. The patient self-isolated and was
treated with an influenza antiviral drug (oseltamivir). CDC indicated that they are not aware of any
of the individual’s close contacts having experienced any symptoms. There is no sign of person-to-
person spread of this virus at this time.
On May 22, 2024, the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services (MDHHS) and US CDC
announced another human case of influenza A (H5) virus identified in a Michigan farmworker who
had regular exposure to dairy cattle infected with avian influenza A (H5N1). This person, diagnosed
with influenza A (H5), had mild eye symptoms and has since recovered. Evidence to date suggests
this is an isolated infection, with no signs of ongoing spread.
CDC has indicated that least 300 people have been monitored due to exposure to infected or
potentially infected animals; of the 37 tested for novel influenza A, to date, two human cases of
avian influenza A(H5N1) have been identified.
The CDC considers the human health risk to the general public from A(H5N1) to be low.
CDC is working with state health departments to monitor workers who may have been in contact
with infected or potentially infected animals and are testing those who develop symptoms.
Based on current scientific evidence, PHAC’s updated risk assessment states that the risk of avian
influenza infection to the general public continues to be low.
Food safety concerns remain focused on consumption of raw milk. While testing can detect viral
fragments from destroyed virus in pasteurized milk, the milk is rendered safe through
pasteurization. From FDA testing to date, live virus has not been recovered from pasteurized milk
samples, and FDA experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness of pasteurization in
inactivating HPAI A(H5N1). Therefore, food safety concerns remain focused on consumption of raw
milk.
CFIA has tested 303 retail milk samples from across Canada, all of which have come back negative
for HPAI viral fragments.
Dairy Cattle Health
As of May 24, 2024, USDA has confirmed 63 detections of HPAI A(H5N1) in dairy herds across
several US states: Texas (14), Kansas (4), Michigan (19), New Mexico (8), Idaho (8), Ohio (1), North
Carolina (1), South Dakota (4), and Colorado (4).
This is the second confirmed event of HPAI A(H5N1) involving livestock in the US, following a
detection in kid goats in Minnesota in March 2024.
Influenza A (including avian influenza) rarely infects livestock, including cattle and goats; avian
influenza has not previously been reported in cattle in the US. Given the number of states and herds
with positive HPAI A(H5N1) detections, cow-to-cow transmission cannot be ruled out.
The possible route(s) of transmission and source(s) of exposure for the human case and cattle
herds remain under investigation.
US federal and state agencies are conducting further testing for HPAI A(H5N1), as well as viral
genome sequencing, to better understand the situation and the HPAI A(H5N1) strain(s) involved.
Testing by the US National Veterinary Services Laboratories has not found changes to the virus that
would make it more transmissible to humans, which would indicate that the current risk to the
public remains low.
Health Portfolio Actions
The Government of Canada, in collaboration with stakeholders, is expanding its surveillance to
manage the possible emergence of HPAI A(H5N1) in Canada by:
requiring negative HPAI A(H5N1) test results for lactating dairy cattle being imported from the
United States to Canada;
conducting enhanced testing of milk at the retail level to determine the presence of HPAI A(H5N1)
viral fragments in commercial milk. The results have been shared on canada.ca; and
facilitating the voluntary testing of cows that are not presenting with clinical signs of HPAI A(H5N1)
to facilitate enhanced industry biosecurity efforts.
Should HPAI A(H5N1) be detected in Canadian cattle, the CFIA will work in close collaboration with
the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada, provinces, territories and industry, providing
testing support through the Canadian Animal Health Surveillance Network (CAHSN).
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is taking a comprehensive, integrated surveillance
approach to A(H5N1), including leveraging its pre-existing surveillance mechanisms which include:
monitoring influenza activity using multiple components to detect and monitor A(H5N1) cases in
humans should they arise (e.g., syndromic surveillance (FluWatchers), laboratory testing (typing),
hospitalization data, (outbreak reporting);
utilizing recently developed national case definitions to support provincial and territorial public
health authorities’ reporting of confirmed and probable human cases of A(H5N1) to PHAC within 24
hours. Confirmed cases of A(H5N1) are notifiable under the International Health Regulations
(2005); and
Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) monitors public information sources to detect
and communicate information about potential public health threats worldwide – including A(H5N1)
cases in humans and animals.
PHAC is also working with key federal, provincial, territorial, local public health and academic
partners to establish protocols for enhanced active human surveillance and studies of individuals
highly exposed to animals that may have HPAI that could complement existing integrated influenza
surveillance.
With Canadian retail milk samples having tested negative for HPAI viral fragments, PHAC continues
to work with CFIA and Health Canada to inform potential future milk testing to support early
detection of A(H5N1) in cattle and the associated preparedness activities.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada, including the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, the Public Health
Agency of Canada and Health Canada are taking a proactive approach to preparedness for Canada
with animal and human health partners both domestically and internationally.
Based on current scientific evidence, the risk of avian influenza infection to the general public
remains very low.
As of April 29, 2024, Canada requires testing for HPAI on all imported dairy cattle from the U.S. to
ensure that sick cattle and products from sick cattle do not enter the food chain.
In addition to the robust protective measures which already exist, the Government of Canada has
conducted enhanced testing of Canadian milk at the retail level to assess the potential presence of
HPAI A(H5N1) in Canadian dairy cattle. All 303 samples from across the country have tested
negative for HPAI A(H5N1) viral fragments in milk.
The Government of Canada, in collaboration with stakeholders, is enhancing surveillance by
expanding testing of cattle in Canada to include voluntary testing of cows that are not presenting
with clinical signs of HPAI.
Federal preparedness actions span the continuum from monitoring and risk assessment,
laboratory capacity, updated guidance and communications, science coordination, and medical
countermeasure readiness.
To date, Canada has not detected HPAI in Canadian cattle and there have been no domestically
acquired cases among people in Canada.
Canada uses a comprehensive integrated surveillance approach to detect and monitor cases in
humans should they arise. Public health authorities are required to report confirmed and probable
cases to PHAC within 24 hours.
IF PRESSED ON RISK TO HUMAN HEALTH
Human infections with A(H5N1) are rare and are almost always acquired through direct contact
with infected birds or exposure to heavily contaminated environments.
Through food/drink
There is no evidence to suggest that eating thoroughly cooked food could transmit A(H5N1) to
humans.
Recent negative results of testing by USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service reaffirm that the US
meat supply is safe.
The latest information from the US Food and Drug Administration’s testing of A(H5N1) in milk
samples shows pasteurization is effective in killing the virus.
To date, retail milk samples tested from across Canada have been negative for HPAI A(H5N1) viral
fragments.
Pasteurized cow’s milk remains safe to drink. Pasteurization is a requirement for sale of cow’s milk
in Canada.
Drinking raw or unpasteurized milk comes with an increased risk of serious illness.
Through interaction with animals
To help prevent the risk of transmission of avian influenza, people should avoid contact with sick or
dead wild birds and other wildlife. Canadians are encouraged to visit the canada.ca website for
additional information.
People who are in close contact with infected birds or mammals and their environments (such as
farmers, veterinarians, hunters, and wildlife workers) should take precautions to avoid getting sick
including:
wearing appropriate personal protective equipment.
practicing good hand hygiene; and
following recommended biosecurity practices.
The Public Health Agency has partnered with the Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and
Safety on advice on how to protect against avian influenza at work and is developing further
resources. Canadians are encouraged to visit their website for additional information.
Additional information on human health and avian influenza is available on a dedicated website on
Canada.ca.
IF PRESSED ON REGULATORY ROLE, LAB CAPACITY, ANTIVIRAL TREATMENT AND VACCINES
Regulatory Role
H5N1 is classified as a risk group 3 human pathogen and a risk group 3 animal pathogen and is
therefore regulated by both the Public Health Agency of Canada and the Canadian Food Inspection
Agency in Canada.
The Public Health Agency of Canada regulates facilities working with H5N1 under the Human
Pathogens and Toxins Act and Regulations. H5N1 is a Security Sensitive Biological Agent, which
means that it has the potential to be weaponized.
The Canadian Food Inspection Agency regulates H5N1 under the Health of Animals Act and
Regulations. It is considered a non-indigenous pathogen, which requires enhanced control
measures to prevent the introduction of the pathogen into domestic animal populations.
No new laboratories seeking to work with H5N1 can come online without approval from both the
Public Health Agency of Canada and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency; it is two distinct
authorizations.
There are currently 8 facilities licensed by the Public Health Agency for work with avian influenza
(H5). Of these, 6 facilities are dually authorized, meaning they are also authorized by the Food
Inspection Agency to work with H5N1.
Simple human diagnostic testing with primary specimens is exempt from the license requirement,
provided that: the pathogen is in the environment and is naturally occurring; and the pathogen has
not been cultivated.
Lab capacity
Canada’s laboratory surveillance network between the federal, provincial, and territorial
governments is prepared to deal with emerging infectious diseases, including A(H5N1). This
network has the capacity to test thousands of samples per day.
Canadian academics are conducting wastewater monitoring for A(H5), however, the reliability of
A(H5) detection in wastewater has not been validated. One significant limitation is the inability to
differentiate the source of positive wastewater samples (i.e., from wildlife, human or
livestock/poultry sources) making it challenging to accurately interpret results.
Canada is working in collaboration with the Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network (CPHLN)
to ensure adherence to biosecurity and regulatory measures across laboratory facilities working
with A(H5N1), including those involved in diagnostic activities. Canada is working to develop an
advisory to assist diagnostic labs in the handling of specimens that may contain or are suspected
to contain A(H5N1).
Influenza Antivirals
Circulating strains of A(H5N1) remain susceptible to antiviral treatments.
The Government of Canada, as well as provincial and territorial governments, maintain stockpiles
of antivirals to help ensure equitable pan-Canadian access to a secure, government-controlled
supply.
Pandemic Influenza Vaccines
Vaccination for humans against A(H5N1) is not recommended at this time but the Government of
Canada will continue to work with international counterparts and manufacturers to monitor
research and development of candidate A(H5N1) vaccines.
In the unlikely event that avian influenza leads to a human outbreak or pandemic, PHAC could
exercise options in its pandemic influenza vaccine (PIV) readiness contracts to order PIV targeting
the avian influenza strain of concern.
BACKGROUND
Historically, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) affecting birds and other animals has
been most prevalent in areas of Asia and Africa; however, it has recently spread throughout Europe
and the Americas, and most recently into wildlife in Antarctica. Since 2022, the virus has become
widespread through migration of wild birds and has affected many different wild species and many
poultry farms globally since then.
Since December 20, 2021, HPAI A(H5N1) has been detected in wild birds in all provinces and
territories in Canada. Additionally, since February 2022, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(CFIA) has reported cases of HPAI A(H5N1) in domestic bird flocks in 9 provinces (Newfoundland
and Labrador, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta,
and British Columbia). Since April 2022, HPAI A(H5N1) has also been detected in wild mammals
such as foxes, skunks, raccoons, seals, wild mink and bears from all provinces and one territory,
and in domestic mammals (e.g., dog, several cats) from two provinces. To date, HPAI A(H5N1) has
been detected in 422 premises in Canada since the start of this outbreak in late 2021, and more
than 11 million commercial and backyard birds have been impacted.
HPAI A(H5N1) has also been detected in domestic cats in Poland, South Korea and the US (as well
as those mentioned above in Canada), farmed fur animals in Finland, marine mammals in several
countries, and most recently in livestock (e.g., goats and cattle) in the US. These detections in
mammals are concerning as influenza viruses can easily change, and the Government of Canada is
closely monitoring the situation for signals of increased adaptation to mammals or evidence of
increased risk for human-to-human transmission.
Detections of HPAI A(H5N1) in wild and domestic mammals are not unexpected given some of
these species are known to eat or be exposed to wild birds or live in environments that may be
heavily contaminated with avian influenza viruses. However, there appears to be an increase in the
number of reported mammal detections in Canada and globally compared to previous avian
influenza outbreaks, likely due to the prolonged duration and extensive geographic spread of the
current HPAI A(H5N1) outbreak. Current scientific evidence suggests the risk of a human
contracting avian influenza from a domestic or wild mammal is very low, however, people in close
contact with infected animals (such as farmers, veterinarians, hunters, and wildlife workers) are at
increased risk of exposure and infection and should take precautions.
Avian influenza detection in dairy cattle is unusual and unexpected. The USDA and the CDC have
confirmed that the avian influenza in the dairy cattle is the same strain that is currently circulating
in the Pacific Flyway (i.e., HPAI A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b). The USDA and CFIA believe farm-to-farm
transmission is likely due to the movement of animals between farms (including poultry and dairy).
With these recent HPAI A(H5N1) detections in 63 herds of dairy cattle in nine states (as of May 24,
2024), as well as the detection of viral fragments (RNA) in commercial pasteurized milk samples in
the United States, further research and information is required on whether HPAI A(H5N1) can be
transmitted through consumption of unpasteurized (raw) milk and products (such as cheese) made
from raw milk from infected cows.
For the general population in Canada, PHAC has assessed that the current likelihood of human
infection with HPAI A(H5N1) acquired from livestock is very low; the likelihood of infection for
people with higher levels of exposure to infectious livestock is at most low.
As a general precaution, members of the public should not handle live or dead wild birds or other
wildlife. Specific wildlife handling guidelines for hunters, wildlife rehabilitators, aviculturists and
bird banders are available on Canada.ca. In July 2023, PHAC updated its Guidance on human
health issues related to avian influenza in Canada (HHAI) to provide recommendations for public
health authorities at all levels of government, as well as other partners and stakeholders involved in
the shared responsibility and management of actual and potential human health issues related to
avian influenza outbreaks, with an overall goal of successful response and containment.
PHAC is taking a proactive One Health approach to preparedness by engaging with the CFIA, Health
Canada, ECCC and other federal and international partners, has led a HPAI A(H5N1) scenario
planning activity to clarify roles and responsibilities and identify gaps and areas of collaboration in
the event of sustained human transmission. Planning can be leveraged for all HPAI A(H5N1) events
and other respiratory infectious diseases.
The annual seasonal influenza vaccine ("flu shot") does not provide protection against avian
influenza. However, getting a seasonal flu shot each year can help reduce the spread of human
influenza viruses between people and between people and animals.
HEALTH WORKFORCE CHALLENGES
UPDATE ON BUDGET PROPOSAL
Budget 2024 proposes to provide $77.1 million over four years, starting in 2025-26, to address
critical health human resource supply challenges.
This funding will support the integration of internationally educated health care professionals
(IEHPs) into Canada’s health workforce by reducing barriers and addressing critical gaps in training
opportunities.
Funding will create 120 medical residency training positions, increase assessment capacity to
support accelerated licensure processes and get IEHPs working more quickly and provide support
to help IEHPs navigate credential recognition systems.
In addition to that, we will be working to streamline foreign credential recognition in health sector
and work closely with health professionals to address administrative burden.
There are an estimated 198,000 internationally educated health professionals employed in Canada,
but only 58 per cent—114,000 workers—have employment in their chosen field. Red tape is holding
back tens of thousands of doctors, nurses, and other health care professionals. This measure will
help address that.
Canada’s health workforce is the backbone of our health care system, and this funding will ensure
internationally educated health professionals can get to work more quickly in Canada so that the
health workforce is able to provide high-quality, accessible, and effective health services for people
living in Canada.
ISSUE
Canada’s health workforce continues to face challenging workplace conditions. High patient
workloads, lack of resources, mandatory overtime and fear for personal safety have led to high
levels of burnout, absences, and turnover.
KEY FACTS
There are not enough health care workers to meet the current demand for services.
Statistics Canada has reported that job vacancies reached 95,200 in the first quarter of 2023, more
than double than in the first quarter of 2020 (43,000).
Health care workers are working more overtime (OT) than ever before. Since 2019, the proportion of
health care workers who reported working OT increased each year. By 2022, 31.7% of full-time
nurses and 18.2% of personal support workers (PSWs)/care aides put in additional hours over
scheduled paid hours (includes both paid and unpaid OT).
14.5% of Canadians do not have a primary health care provider. Without a primary health care
provider, emergency rooms become the only accessible option for seeking health care.
Lacking in both staff and physical space for the increasing patient load, hospital emergency rooms
across the country have had to temporarily close their doors, particularly in rural areas.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada recognizes the immense contributions health professionals make every
day and we share their concerns about the challenges they are facing, and their collective impacts.
Budget 2024 proposes to provide $77.1 million over four years, starting in 2025-26, to address
critical health human resource supply challenges.
This funding will support the integration of internationally educated health care professionals
(IEHPs) into Canada’s health workforce by reducing barriers and addressing critical gaps in training
opportunities.
Budget 2024 investments will build on investments in Budget 2023 which confirmed the
Government of Canada’s plan to provide close to $200 billion over 10 years to provinces and
territories, including an immediate, unconditional $2 billion Canada Health Transfer top-up to
address immediate pressures on the health care system, especially in pediatric hospitals and
emergency rooms, and long wait times for surgeries.
$25 billion over 10 years to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements
as well as an annual increase to the Canada Health Transfer for the next four years were confirmed.
These investments will accelerate efforts already underway with provinces and territories to
support the retention and recruitment of health workers; support streamlined foreign credential
recognition for internationally educated health professionals and increase labour mobility starting
with multi-jurisdictional recognition of health professional licenses.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ABOUT INCREASING AND MAINTAINING SUPPLY
$25 billion over 10 years will advance shared health priorities, including supporting our health
workers and reducing backlogs, through tailored bilateral agreements with provinces and
territories.
In addition, funding of $1.7 billion will support hourly wage increases for personal support workers
and related professions, as federal, provincial and territorial governments work together on how to
best support the recruitment and retention of these workers.
These investments will accelerate efforts already underway with provinces and territories to
support the recruitment and retention of health workers within the public health care system.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SUPPORT FOR HEALTH WORKERS
The Government is very concerned about the mental health and well-being of Canadians, and of
frontline workers who are working tirelessly to keep us safe and healthy.
In recent years, the federal government has invested more than $290 million in funding to support
the mental health of Canadians.
Health investments confirmed in Budget 2023 include $25 billion over 10 years for bilateral
agreements that will focus on four shared priorities, including mental health and substance use.
As there is no health without mental health, provinces and territories were asked to take an
integrated, inclusive approach to investments in health service teams, the health workforce and
data and digital tools required to meet the health and mental health needs of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS TO PROTECT HEALTH WORKERS AGAINST HARASSMENT
We have heard many stories about physicians, nurses and other health workers who have been
threatened and intimidated, in person and online. This behavior is completely unacceptable.
Healthcare funding introduced in Budget 2023 prioritizes the health workforce and will allow
provincial and territorial governments to address challenges faced by health workers such as
violence, discrimination, and racism.
All Canadians, and especially health workers, whose goal is help others, deserve a safe working
environment, free from violence and threats.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s health workers are facing serious challenges. These challenges require transformative
and innovative solutions to address problems that have existed for years, with new and different
levels of collaboration required across governments and stakeholders.
FPT Collaboration
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health
services, the responsibility for the management of health workforces falls within provincial and
territorial jurisdictions and their regulators. Health Canada will continue to work collaboratively
with provinces and territories to drive concrete steps necessary to address health workforce
situation.
On October 12, 2023 FPT Ministers of Health issued a public statement reaffirming their
commitment to supporting Canada’s health workforce so our health workers are able to provide
high-quality, accessible, and effective health services for people living in Canada. In particular, FPT
governments committed to concrete actions focusing on:
Retention, reducing rates of stress and burnout and improving workplace culture, flexibility, and
wellness so health workers can stay in their jobs;
Domestic education supply and demand, enhancing Canada’s capacity to produce a domestic
supply of key health professionals, including more training opportunities for Indigenous Peoples
that meets national demand for care and keeps pace with a growing and aging population;
Foreign credential recognition and ethical recruitment, making Canada a country of choice for
health care providers by reducing the time it takes for internationally educated health professionals
(IEHPs) to join our workforce;
Labour mobility, supporting an agile and flexible workforce to support access to care; and
Health workforce data and planning, improving the availability, sharing and standardization of
health workforce data to support health workforce planning.
Recent Federal Investments
Budget 2024 proposed $77.1 million over four years, starting in 2025-2026 to effectively integrate
internationally educated health care professionals into Canada’s health workforce by creating 120
medical residency training positions, increasing assessment capacity and providing support to
navigate credential recognition systems.
The Canada Health Transfer (CHT) continues to provide ongoing support to provinces and territories
in the delivery of health care. In Budget 2023, the Government of Canada confirmed new federal
investments in healthcare that includes several initiatives that can support the health workforce:
An immediate and unconditional $2 billion CHT top-up to address immediate pressures on the
health care system, especially in pediatric hospitals and emergency rooms, and long wait times for
surgeries.
$25 billion over 10 years to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements
that will support the needs of people in each province and territory in four areas of shared priority:
family health services; health workers and backlogs; mental health and substance use; and a
modernized health system. These additional federal investments will be contingent on continued
health care investments by provinces and territories. This funding builds on the $7.8 billion over five
years that has yet to flow to provinces and territories for mental health and substance use, home
and community care, and long-term care.
$1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage increases for personal support workers and
related professions, as federal, provincial, and territorial governments work together on how best to
support recruitment and retention.
$2 billion over 10 years to address the unique challenges Indigenous Peoples face when it comes to
fair and equitable access to quality and culturally safe health care services.
$505 million over 5 years to Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), Canada Health
Infoway and federal data partners to work with provinces and territories on developing new health
data indicators, to support the creation of Health Workforce Canada, a centre of excellence on
health worker data, to advance digital health tools and an interoperability roadmap, and to
underpin efforts to use data to improve safety and quality of care.
In addition to this funding, in the previous two years, the federal government has provided provinces
and territories with $6 billion in top up funding through the CHT, distributed equally per capita, to
help provinces and territories address immediate health care system pressures, including reducing
medical backlogs caused by COVID-19.
Other Federal Government Actions
The federal government is supporting provinces and territories to strengthen their health systems,
including sustainably increasing the supply of health workers and helping create healthier
workplaces to support retention and the mental health of health workers. Other recent federal
actions and investments include:
On November 1, 2022, the Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health
Workers. The Coalition’s efforts are focused on identifying approaches to drive pan-Canadian
action and progress on policy implementation, informed by real world perspectives.
The Coalition is comprised of representatives from key groups, including nurses, doctors, personal
support workers, colleges and universities, patients, and equity-seeking communities, and reports
to the Deputy Minister of Health.
On August 24, 2022, Health Canada announced Dr. Leigh Chapman as the federal Chief Nursing
Officer (CNO). Dr. Chapman has brought nursing issues into focus federally, while working closely
with provinces and territories, stakeholders and regulatory bodies.
In August 2023, Health Canada appointed Dr. Geneviève Moineau as Chief Medical Workforce
Advisor (CMWA) to help support the federal response to current health workforce challenges.
Health Canada will continue to collaborate closely with other federal departments, provinces and
territories and health care system stakeholders to address these pressing health workforce
challenges.
Mental Health
In September 2022, a Report from the Mental Health Commission noted that it remains critical to
break down cultural barriers and mental health stigma in health care organizations and prioritize
psychological health and safety beyond the pandemic.
The Government of Canada continues to make significant investments to help provincial and
territorial health systems address mental health issues and system capacity. This includes $25
billion over 10 years to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements that
will support the needs of people in each province and territory in four areas of shared priority:
family health services; health workers and backlogs; mental health and substance use; and a
modernized health system. This builds on investments through Budget 2017 that provided $5 billion
over 10 years ($3 billion remains until 2027) to improve Canadians’ access to mental health
services.
SECURITY AT NML
ISSUE
Concerns have been raised regarding security at the National Microbiology Lab (NML) in Winnipeg
following the tabling of documents related to the investigation of activities on February 28, 2024
and employment termination of two NML scientists.
KEY FACTS
The Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal Health, the only facility in Canada operating
Containment Level 4 laboratories, is home to both the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC)
National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) as well as the Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s National
Centre for Foreign Animal Disease. The facility incorporates stringent security protocols and
procedures for its operations.
Due to the nature of the facility, we have implemented – and continue to review and modify as
required – rigorous security protocols to ensure the protection of employees and assets.
Corporate policies and procedures to vet access to the facility have been reviewed to strengthen
the security posture. Furthermore, the facility physical security assessment has been renewed, and
proposed changes will further enhance various aspects of the facility’s security.
KEY MESSAGES
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) continues to invest significant time and attention to
ensure research and science are conducted across the organization with a firm security mindset.
PHAC continues to place a strong emphasis on respecting and enforcing all policies and
procedures, both new and existing, that secure the National Microbiology Laboratory’s (NML) work
and safeguard against a continually evolving threat environment, including threats to IT security.
This is consistent with efforts across the Government of Canada to support innovation and
research while also protecting national security.
As a federally regulated institution, PHAC’s NML complies with biosecurity regulations, the Human
Pathogens and Toxins Act, and the Transportation of Dangerous Goods Program, and works closely
with regulatory bodies to ensure ongoing compliance.
The processes and procedures that are in place will continue to be evaluated and enhanced with a
view to continuously protect the confidence and trust of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH SECURITY
PHAC has established clear governance in regard to collaborations and regular training and
communication on employee accountabilities. This includes putting in place the mandatory use of
Materials Transfer Agreements and appropriate agreements to structure collaborations, such as
Collaborative Research Agreements.
Existing international collaborations were reviewed from a security perspective and new
collaborations are reviewed by a Science Security Committee.
The Government has also recently introduced a series of measures to safeguard Canadian
Research, including implementing the new Policy on Sensitive Technology Research and Affiliations
of Concern, launching Canada’s new Research Security Centre, as announced in Budget 2022, and
supporting post-secondary institutions with a total investment of close to $50 million through the
Research Support Fund.
This means any new collaborations with any country or organization would be assessed on a case-
by-case basis, and vetted for scientific value and security considerations prior to approval.
The NML is not currently engaged in any bilateral research collaboration with the People’s Republic
of China (PRC). Any new research collaborations would be assessed on a case-by-case basis and
vetted for both scientific value and security considerations prior to approval.
IF PRESSED ON SECURITY CHANGES
PHAC has invested significant time and attention to ensure research and science are conducted
with strict security compliance. Specific physical, personnel, and operational security measures
have been employed and a strong emphasis has been placed on respecting and enforcing policies
and procedures that secure the current work and safeguard against a continually evolving threat
environment.
These processes and procedures are regularly re-evaluated to ensure the security of the NML.
Examples of some the security changes include, but are not limited to:
Implementing new X-ray protocols at the entry to the facility;
Enhancing vetting of visitors to the lab by PHAC Security;
Strengthening protocols for deliveries/shipping and receiving biological materials, including
controls to ensure all documentation is in place and verified;
Instituting additional controls around IT access; and,
Modernizing IT security infrastructure in collaboration with the Communications Security
Establishment.
BACKGROUND
Ad Hoc Committee process
In May 2023, the Government announced the membership of an Ad hoc Committee of
Parliamentarians and a Panel of Arbiters to set out a process for the review and tabling in
Parliament of classified documents related to the investigation into activities and ultimate
termination of employment of two National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) scientists.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) worked closely with the independent Panel of Arbiters,
through the Ad-Hoc Committee process, to support the Panel in its recommendations to the
Committee on what information should be released in the public interest. The information was
vetted for release by the independent Panel of Arbiters, which was entrusted to determine which
information could be released in the public interest and which information had to remain
protected. The Panel determined that the documents could be disclosed with fewer redactions, in
favour of more transparency.
PHAC has consistently sought to protect information disclosure of which it considered would be
injurious to national security and has consistently applied the requirements of the Privacy Act to
protect private employee information and to respect ongoing labour relations proceedings.
PHAC disclosed personal information to the Ad Hoc Committee of Parliamentarians and the Panel
of Arbiters on public interest grounds as described in the Privacy Act.
Improvements to lab security
The National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) has always operated as a secured facility, though the
administrative investigation initiated in 2019 highlighted that policies and procedures in place at
the time needed to be updated to mitigate the risks posed by the current threat environment. In
response, the Agency has invested significant time and attention to ensure research and science
policies have a renewed focus on security. Specific physical, personnel, and operational security
measures have been updated, while also galvanizing an institutional culture that recognizes the
ever shifting threat landscape and the need of public servants to stay abreast of the policies and
procedures that secure the important work and assets at the NML.
These improvements include:
Enhanced overall physical and security screening measures for all staff and external visitors. The
requirement to escort visitors at all times is mandatory and additional monitoring has been put in
place to ensure compliance;
Strengthened access management and monitoring with a new access control system.
Enhanced physical security including additional, and continual training and review of guard
services;
Strengthened protocols for deliveries/shipping and receiving, including controls to ensure all
documentation is in place and verified for infectious materials;
Improved management of intellectual property (IP) and materials through specific requirements for
Materials Transfer Agreements and Collaborative Research Agreements and enforcement of their
use;
Implemented mandatory training to raise awareness and provide guidance on security
responsibilities and accountabilities for all staff and security guards;
Updated training for new staff so they have a full understanding of their accountabilities and
management expectations with respect to security are clear;
Established clear and consistent communication to emphasize employee responsibilities in
regards to security and conflict of interest;
Comprehensive threat-risk assessments for physical and IT environments to ensure security
measures are complete and up to date;
Reinforced information management and document classification requirements, including the use
of corporate document repositories, messaging and training on acceptable use of devices, and
compliance with Treasury Board Secretariat requirements related to information categorization,
transmittal and destruction;
Updated policy on affiliations and collaboration with academic, research and health care
organizations. All collaborations both in Canada or abroad must be documented and reviewed by a
Science Security Committee; and
Implementation of additional controls on student hiring.
In recognition of the ever evolving threat environment, processes and procedures will be regularly
re-evaluated to ensure the security of the NML as threats are identified or anticipated.
CANADA HEALTH ACT – ABORTION SERVICES
ISSUE
The availability of surgical abortion varies both between provinces and territories and nationally.
Health Canada is aware of coverage issues resulting in patient charges for surgical abortion
services in a limited number of private clinics in Ontario (5). The one private clinic that had been
charging patients in New Brunswick closed in February 2024. These patient charges are considered
user charges under the Canada Health Act.
KEY FACTS
Abortion services are deemed medically necessary and are insured in all provinces and territories.
Patient charges for medically necessary surgical abortion services in private clinics have resulted in
mandatory Canada Health Transfer (CHT) deductions to Ontario ($86,065 since March 2021) and to
New Brunswick ($444,041 since March 2020).
In recognition of actions taken to eliminate these patient charges, such as the introduction of new
legislation in 2023, Ontario has received partial reimbursement of its CHT deductions under the
CHA Reimbursement Policy totaling $43,296 to date.
Though the one private clinic in New Brunswick closed in February 2024, the retrospective nature of
reporting under the Canada Health Act means New Brunswick will still face deductions for patient
charges levied in fiscal 2022-2023 and 2023-2024.
KEY MESSAGES
This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that no
one should be forced to carry an unwanted or unsafe pregnancy.
Health Canada has taken action under the Canada Health Act to combat patient charges for
access to insured surgical abortion services by levying deductions to Ontario and to New
Brunswick’s Canada Health Transfers.
In recognition of actions taken to eliminate these patient charges, Ontario has also received partial
reimbursement of its Canada Health Transfer deductions under the CHA Reimbursement Policy.
In addition, this Government has invested $8 million to date under the Sexual and Reproductive
Health Fund to support access to abortion.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER COMPLIANCE ACTION UNDER THE CANADA HEALTH ACT
While abortion services are insured in all provinces and territories there is still work to be done to
improve access in many areas of the country.
Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to implement their action plan,
which is expected to eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services.
Though the one private clinic in New Brunswick closed in February 2024, New Brunswick will still
face deductions for patient charges levied through 2023-2024 for refusing to provide coverage for
these services.
IF PRESSED ON THE SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH FUND
This Government is committed to making sexual and reproductive health (SRH) care, information,
and services more accessible for populations facing the highest risks and greatest barriers to SRH.
Through Budget 2021 and 2023, $81 million has been committed to the Sexual and Reproductive
Health Fund over 6 years.
The Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund supports community-based organizations that help
make access to abortion, and other sexual and reproductive health care information and services
more accessible for Indigenous, racialized, 2SLGBTQI+ populations, newcomers, people living with
disabilities (including chronic conditions), as well as women and youth from underserved
populations.
IF PRESSED ON THE MARCH 21 RELEASE OF THE SURVEY ENTITLED INDUCED ABORTIONS
REPORTED IN CANADA IN 2022 BY THE CANADIAN INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH INFORMATION
CIHI released 2022 data on abortions in Canada on March 21, 2024.
Access to abortion appears to be improving in Canada. There were an estimated 97,211 reported
induced abortions in Canada in 2022. This is a 11% increase from the 87,485 induced abortions
reported in 2021.
The data also indicates a 3% increase in medical abortions, and an increased proportion occurring
outside of hospitals. This points towards increased access to abortion earlier in gestation, and less
need for travel for people living in underserved communities.
HC uses this data to inform CHA deductions to NB, due to the province’s refusal to cover these
medically necessary services when provided outside the hospital setting, or to report on them
when they occur.
BACKGROUND
The aim of the Canada Health Act is to ensure that all eligible residents of Canadian provinces and
territories have reasonable access to medically necessary hospital, physician, and surgical-dental
services that require a hospital setting on a prepaid basis, without charges related to the provision
of insured health care services.
Health Canada’s top priority is to protect the health and safety of people in Canada, including those
who choose to end their pregnancy. Abortion services are deemed medically necessary and are
insured in all provinces and territories. Individuals should not face charges when seeking these
insured services, regardless of where the services are provided.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, evidence in Ontario confirmed that some private abortion clinics charged fees for
uninsured services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect
to accessing insured surgical abortion services. Since March 2021, deductions totaling $86,065
have been levied against the ON’s Canada Health Transfer (CHT) payments in respect of patient
charges for surgical abortion services.
Under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy provinces and territories that face mandatory
deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with Health Canada to develop a
plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the circumstances that led
to them within a specified timeframe. Ontario is in the process of implementing its Reimbursement
Action Plan, including the introduction of regulations under legislation that was passed in 2023,
which is expected to eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services. In recognition of
actions taken by Ontario to eliminate these patient charges, per the Reimbursement Policy, partial
reimbursements of its 2022, 2023 and 2024 deductions totaling $43,296 have been authorized to
date.
Access to Abortion in New Brunswick
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of
surgical abortion services to approved hospitals. This means that individuals who receive these
services at the private clinic in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the
only province with a private abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province does not provide
coverage for services. In December 2022, the Government of NB passed legislation allowing for
some insured surgeries to occur in private clinics (including cataracts) as a means of reducing
surgical waitlists. However, this new legislation does not extend to surgical abortion services in
private clinics. Since March 2020, deductions totaling $444,041 have been levied against the NB’s
CHT payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. Though Clinic 554
closed in February 2024, given the retrospective nature of reporting patient charges under the
Canada Health Act, New Brunswick will face additional deductions for patient charges levied in
fiscal 2022-2023 and 2023-2024.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) filed a statement of claim in
the NB courts, as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive Regulation 84-20 and was
granted standing on June 2, 2021. The group argues that the regulation is inconsistent with and in
violation of the Canada Health Act. The case is currently in the discovery phase and the CCLA is
awaiting information from the province, which was requested in January 2022. A trial date has yet to
be set.
PANDEMIC AGREEMENT
ISSUE
Through an Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB), Member States of the World Health
Organization (WHO) are developing a new WHO instrument (i.e., a convention, treaty, accord,
agreement or other international instrument) on pandemic prevention, preparedness, response
and recovery.
KEY FACTS
In December 2021, Canada and other WHO Member States agreed to launch the INB, a Member
State-led process to develop a Pandemic Agreement.
INB Negotiations began in February 2023 following the release of the Zero Draft. The text has
subsequently gone through a number of iterations; a revised WHO Pandemic Agreement
negotiating text was shared with Member States on April 22, 2024.
A progress report was presented at the 76th World Health Assembly (WHA) in May 2023, and a final
outcome (i.e., a finalized agreement) is expected to be presented for consideration at the 77th WHA
in May 2024.
KEY MESSAGES
COVID-19 has demonstrated the need to take bold action to ensure we are better prepared for the
next pandemic.
Canada is working closely with international partners, including the World Health Organization and
the Pan American Health Organization, and the broader global community to strengthen global
health security.
With respect to global health threats that cross borders, we can best advance and protect
Canadian interests through effective rules-based international systems.
Canada supports the development and negotiation of a WHO international agreement to improve
multilateral cooperation on pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and recovery.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA’S POSITION ON THE PANDEMIC INSTRUMENT OR SOVEREIGNTY
CONSIDERATIONS
When negotiating a new international agreement, the Government of Canada will always carefully
consider:
its potential impact on our existing domestic laws and policies; and
if there is a need for domestic legislation to implement our international obligations.
If Canada decides to ratify the Pandemic Agreement, the Government of Canada will remain
responsible for and in control of any future domestic decisions about national restrictions or other
measures related to pandemics. The WHO is an international organization that does not have
jurisdiction in Canada.
IF PRESSED – ENGAGEMENT WITH PROVINCES, TERRITORIES, INDIGENOUS ORGANIZATIONS AND
OTHER PARTNERS AND STAKEHOLDERS ON THE INSTRUMENT
Canada is taking a whole-of-government, whole-of-society approach in the development of the
Pandemic Agreement to ensure that Canadian priorities and values are reflected.
The Government of Canada hosted a Pandemic Instrument (Agreement) Partner and Stakeholder
Engagement Forum in March 2023 to discuss key thematic issues with Canadian academia;
federal, provincial and territorial representatives; Indigenous partners; youth; private sector; and
non-governmental organizations. A follow up Pandemic Agreement Regional Engagement Series
was undertaken in January and February 2024 to gather feedback on the draft negotiating text.
IF PRESSED – HEALTH, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF THE INSTRUMENT
Global efforts to enhance pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and recovery are
expected to yield significant health, social and economic benefits for Canadians and the broader
global community.
BACKGROUND
In December 2021, at the World Health Assembly (WHA), the 194 WHO Member States, including
Canada, agreed to develop a new WHO instrument (i.e., a convention, treaty, accord, agreement, or
other international instrument) on pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response through an
Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB).
The first INB meetings established a process to develop the Pandemic Agreement, including
timelines, milestones and modalities for stakeholder engagement. Member States identified that a
finalized instrument will be considered as a legally binding treaty, convention or agreement, without
excluding the option to adopt the instrument as binding regulations.
Member States themselves are fully leading the process to develop a Pandemic Agreement and will
decide on its content, with the WHO supporting the INB by offering technical, scientific and legal
guidance. Member States submitted a progress report to the 76th WHA in May 2023, and a final
outcome is targeting the 77th WHA in May 2024.
Potential substantive elements of the Pandemic Agreement could include:
improving health equity as a core objective;
strengthening prevention and surveillance measures, including through a One Health approach and
addressing antimicrobial resistance;
leadership and governance issues;
pathogen access and benefit sharing;
health system and workforce strengthening;
improving access to medical countermeasures, including through research and development,
sustainable production, tech transfer on voluntary and mutually agreed terms, supply chain and
logistics, procurement and distribution, and regulatory strengthening; and,
enhancing communication and public awareness and addressing misinformation/ disinformation.
Canada is actively engaged in the Pandemic Agreement process and is committed to a whole-of-
government and whole-of society approach. Canada’s stakeholder engagement strategy is based
on principles of transparency, accountability, and inclusivity, and outlines Canada’s guiding
principles in the development of the instrument. These guiding principles include evidence
informed decision making and respect for national contexts, as well as key multi-sectoral issues
such as One Health and health equity.
The Health Portfolio is working with Global Affairs Canada to engage relevant federal government
departments, provincial and territorial governments, National Indigenous Organizations, and other
partners and stakeholders in the development of the Agreement. Negotiations began on February
27, 2023, based on a principles and objectives-based negotiating mandate.
BREAST IMPLANT REGISTRY
ISSUE
What is the Government doing to establish a national breast implant registry?
KEY FACTS
Breast implant registries are typically used to record the details of individuals who have undergone
breast implant surgery, so that they can be traced in the event of safety concerns relating to a
specific type of implant.
On November 30, 2023, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) tabled a
report in the House of Commons titled “Strengthening the Oversight of Breast Implants”.
The Report made 10 recommendations to improve the oversight of breast implants, which primarily
focus on the creation of a national breast implant registry.
The Government assessed HESA’s recommendations and tabled its response on April 8, 2024. As
initial steps, the Government will engage more broadly with key stakeholders, including provincial
and territorial governments, to discuss potential options to implement a breast implant registry,
and will seek advice from experts on the best way forward to advance work on other
recommendations contained in the HESA report.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada thanks the Standing Committee on Health for its report and
recommendations on the creation of a breast implant registry for Canada.
As initial steps, the Government will engage more broadly with key stakeholders, including
provincial and territorial governments, to discuss potential options to implement a breast implant
registry and will seek advice from experts on the best way forward to advance work on other
recommendations contained in the HESA report.
IF PRESSED ON ESTABLISHING A BREAST IMPLANT REGISTRY
Health Canada has undertaken a number of actions regarding the safety of breast implants,
including the suspension of higher risk breast implants; improved labelling to support informed
decision-making; and increased communication to help keep Canadians up to date with safety
information on breast implants.
The Government recognizes the need to identify concrete solutions for the safety concerns related
to breast implants and for the development and implementation of a national breast implant
registry in Canada and believes that establishing a committee with the required expertise and
knowledge is the best next step. The committee will be established in a timely manner to assess
options and implementation considerations.
IF PRESSED ON BREAST IMPLANT ILLNESS
Health Canada is performing a scientific, evidence-based review of breast implant illness, which is
a term used to describe a variety of symptoms associated with breast implants. Once finalized, the
Department will publish its findings.
BACKGROUND
The House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) report on the oversight of breast
implants was published on November 30, 2023. The Report, which includes 10 recommendations,
states that breast implant recipients are insufficiently protected from adverse outcomes and that
significant gaps remain in the oversight of these devices. The Report’s primary recommendation
was to establish a national breast implant registry, with Recommendation 2 calling for the
Government to establish a committee made up of officials from Health Canada, experts, and
patient representatives, and work with PTs to create the implant registry. Recommendations 3-6
address development and implementation considerations. Recommendations 7 to 10 address
areas such as data collection, research, and better informing Canadians about the risks associated
with breast implants. The Government Response was tabled on April 8, 2024.
The concept of a breast implant registry has been discussed for many years: in the media;
previously at HESA; by physician and patient advocates, including people with lived/living
experience; and at the Health Canada Scientific Advisory Committee on Health Products for
Women. Breast implant registries would typically be used to record the details of individuals who
have undergone breast implant surgery, so that they can be traced in the event of safety concerns
relating to a specific type of implant.
Several OECD countries have breast implant registries, including the United States, the United
Kingdom, Germany, France, Australia, Sweden, and the Netherlands. Currently there is only one
known medical device registry in Canada (the Canadian Joint Replacement Registry, or CJRR)
managed by the Canadian Institute for Health Information, which collects information on hip and
knee replacement surgeries and is used for research purposes to inform clinical practice. The CJRR
is not a safety-recall registry.
In collaboration with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), a Best Brains Exchange
(BBE) meeting was held on March 7, 2023, with researchers, decision-makers, patient partners, and
industry with respect to the implementation of health registries and patient notification.
International and domestic stakeholders from across the health care ecosystem also participated
in the discussion, which highlighted the complexity of a breast implant registry with participants
outlining numerous challenges and complexities. The discussions at the BBE meeting highlighted
key operational considerations, such as establishing clear objectives for the registry and which
organization would be best placed to manage or implement the registry, as well as considerations
about data collection and privacy.
In addition, Health Canada continues to publish information for Canadians and health
professionals to support decision making. Health Canada’s website for breast implants is a
comprehensive page with clear information about the risks available. A July 2023 update addressed
some of the feedback on information communicated about breast implants raised by HESA in
spring 2023, and now includes a fact sheet on breast implants to support discussions between
people seeking breast implants and their physicians. This is in addition to comprehensive
information already available, including: a subscription service to inform interested Canadians
about new government publications on breast implants; Health Canada’s safety reviews of
implants; information to consider before getting implants; and a link to report problems or adverse
effects with implants to Health Canada.
CANADIAN TASK FORCE ON PREVENTIVE HEALTH CARE’S BREAST CANCER SCREENING
GUIDELINE
ISSUE
In 2018, the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care (Task Force) updated its guideline on
screening for breast cancer in women aged 40-74, who are not at increased risk for breast cancer.
Since this guideline’s publication, some advocacy groups, including medical imaging professionals
and researchers, have publicly contested various aspects of the guideline.
The Task Force announced in June 2023 that it was undertaking an expedited update of the 2018
guideline. Due to the complexity and amount of evidence being assessed, a publication date of
spring 2024 is being targeted.
On April 30, 2024, the United States Preventive Services Task Force issued the final version of their
recommendation on breast cancer screening, which includes lowering the age of screening
initiation from 50 to 40. It is anticipated that the release of this final guideline will generate
stakeholder and media interest.
KEY FACTS
In 2020, an estimated 27,400 women in Canada were diagnosed with breast cancer and 5,100 died
from the disease. One in eight (12%) women in Canada are expected to be diagnosed with breast
cancer in their lifetime.
External evaluations of the Task Force’s 2018 breast cancer guideline by the American College of
Physicians in 2019, and independent researchers in 2022, rank the guideline amongst the highest
quality in the world.
KEY MESSAGES
We recognize that breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer and the second leading
cause of cancer death for women in Canada.
We are supportive of the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care’s update of its breast
cancer screening guideline on an expedited basis using the best available scientific evidence and
considerations, including patients’ values and preferences.
In December 2023, the Public Health Agency of Canada published the What We Heard Report from
its knowledge exchange event on breast cancer screening which took place on September 26 and
27, 2023.
IF PRESSED ON THE REVISION TO THE TIMELINE FOR THE TASK FORCE’S GUIDELINE UPDATE:
We are supportive of the Task Force’s efforts and appreciate that more time is necessary to
undertake a comprehensive review given the volume and complexity of the evidence.
The Public Health Agency of Canada is in regular contact with the Task Force concerning the status
of the breast cancer screening guideline, and will continue to work with the Task Force to ensure
the outcome is rigorous, evidence-based, and in the best interest of women and all persons living in
Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE ROLE OF THE CANADIAN TASK FORCE ON PREVENTIVE HEALTH CARE:
The Government of Canada provides funding to the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care,
an arms-length body of up to 15 individuals with experience in primary care, public health,
preventive medicine and guideline methodology.
Task Force guidelines are established by using a rigorous review of available scientific evidence and
research and applying a gold standard approach for the establishment of guidelines.
PHAC ensures rigorous and appropriate methods are used to analyze the scientific evidence that
form the basis of the recommendations made by the Task Force.
IF PRESSED ON WHY THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS NOT FOLLOWING THE LEAD OF THE
UNITED STATES IN LOWERING THE AGE FOR BREAST CANCER SCREENING FROM 50 TO 40:
We recognize that the United States Preventive Services Task Force issued its final
recommendations to lower the screening age from 50 to 40 on April 30, 2024.
The Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care is an independent and arms-length
organization responsible for developing clinical screening guidelines.
The Task Force is currently undertaking an expedited update of its breast cancer screening
guideline using the best available scientific evidence and considerations, including patients’ values
and preferences.
IF PRESSED ON A POLL SUGGESTING THE MAJORITY OF CANADIANS ARE IN FAVOUR OF
LOWERING THE BREAST SCREENING AGE:
We are aware of the recently released Breast Cancer Canada and Angus Reid survey results, as are
the members of the Task Force.
Task Force guidelines and recommendations are established at arms-length from the Government
of Canada, by using a rigorous review of all of the available scientific evidence and research.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS REGARDING ALLEGED BIAS FROM THE TASK FORCE CO-CHAIR:
We are aware that some stakeholders expressed concerns regarding the leadership of the Task
Force.
Officials at the Public Health Agency of Canada have followed up with the Co-Chairs of the Task
Force and have shared concerns with them.
The Task Force Co-Chairs have reaffirmed their commitment to ensure that recommendations are
based on evidence and approved by all members of the Task Force, with input from experts and
patients.
The Agency is regularly engaging with the Task Force to keep apprised of the work of the Task Force.
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES NOT FOLLOWING THE TASK FORCE GUIDELINES:
The mandate of the Task Force is to develop clinical practice guidelines that support primary care
providers.
The Task Force guidelines are not mandatory for provinces and territories to adhere to. However,
most provinces and territories do not have the resources to develop their own guidelines and they
often rely on national guidance.
We are aware that a number of provinces and territories have recently announced changes to their
breast cancer screening programs, expanding eligibility to those in their 40s via self-referral or other
mechanisms.
In their 2018 guideline, the Task Force did not comment on how screening programs should be
implemented as this is outside of their mandate. However, they have recommended that women in
their 40s who choose to be screened should have access to mammographies.
BACKGROUND
The Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care (Task Force) is an independent arms-length
body of up to 15 clinicians and methodologists established and funded by the Public Health Agency
of Canada (PHAC). The Task Force has developed evidence-based clinical practice guidelines on a
range of topics that support primary care providers in the delivery of preventive healthcare.
PHAC’s role in the production of guidelines is to ensure rigorous and appropriate methods are used
to analyze the scientific evidence that forms the basis for the independent recommendations made
by the Task Force. PHAC scientific staff members are authors on Task Force guidelines but do not
vote on nor endorse the recommendations.
Task Force Recommendations
Recommendations from the Task Force’s current guideline from 2018 apply to women aged 40 to 74
years who are not at increased risk of breast cancer:
For women aged 40 to 49 years – do not screen with mammography.
For women aged 50 to 69 years – screen with mammography every two to three years.
For women aged 70 to 74 years – screen with mammography every two to three years.
These recommendations are conditional on the relative value a woman places on possible benefits
and harms from screening and stress the importance of shared decision-making between women
and their healthcare providers to support an informed decision. In addition, the recommendations
are consistent with the Task Force’s previous recommendation in 2011, and those in the United
Kingdom and Australia.
On May 9, 2023, the United States Preventive Services Task Force published a draft update to their
2016 recommendations. Their previous 2016 guideline aligned with the Canadian Task Force’s 2018
guidance. The updated recommendation, which was subject to public comment until June 5, 2023,
lowers the age of first screening from 50 to 40. The change from age 50 to age 40 was based on
trends in rates of breast cancer in this age group over time in the United States. It is also based on
formal modelling commissioned for this guideline which indicated a small potential benefit for
women in this age (1.3 additional breast cancer deaths averted per 1,000 women screened
beginning at 40 compared to starting at 50). They also examined randomized controlled trials and
observational studies but did not identify any that provided additional evidence for screening in this
age group. They also concluded there is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against
screening above the age of 74, or additional screening (e.g., ultrasound or MRI) for women with
dense breasts.
A final version of the recommendations was published on the United States Preventive Services
Task Force website and in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) on April 30th,
2024. The final version is consistent with the draft, but includes additional clarifications on the
evidence behind the guideline, in response to public comments.
While important to be aware of international comparators, changes to guidelines are often made
based on data specific to the jurisdiction. For example the US guideline change was based on their
epidemiological data and modelling the American population. It will be important that any change
to Task Force guidelines leverages Canadian data to the extent possible.
Federal/Provincial/Territorial and Stakeholder Considerations
Presently, the majority of provincial and territorial screening programs operate in adherence to the
Task Force’s guideline. Alberta updated their screening guidelines in 2022, reducing the age for
screening to 45 from 50. This was based on their local epidemiological data as well as modelling.
Several provinces do permit screening earlier based on a care provider’s referral or self-referral. For
example, in October 2023, the Government of Ontario lowered the eligibility age to self-refer for
regular breast cancer screening to 40. New Brunswick made a similar announcement in September
2023. Self-referral for women in their 40s was already in place in other provinces (BC, NS, PEI).
Many stakeholders are supportive of the 2018 guideline, including the College of Family Physicians
of Canada. In late 2022, the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer and the Canadian Cancer
Society withdrew their support for the 2018 guideline and called on the Task Force to undertake a
review of this guideline. The Nurse Practitioners’ Association of Canada withdrew their support of
the 2018 guideline in early 2024.
Since the release of the 2018 guideline, some advocacy groups and researchers have publicly
expressed concerns about several aspects of the guideline, including the age to screen, that it does
not include recommendations on supplemental screening for women with dense breast tissue, and
that it recommends against breast self-exams.
The Task Force made the decision to update their 2018 guideline in early 2023 prior to the release of
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force updated guideline. On June 7, 2023, the Task Force publicly
announced that it would conduct an expedited review and update of its 2018 breast screening
guideline.
On June 8, 2023, the Government of Canada announced up to $500,000 in additional funding for
the Task Force to help with the expedited timeline for this project. The Task Force accepted
evidence submissions from Canadians through an online portal during August 2023 for
consideration for inclusion in their review of the evidence regarding breast cancer screening.
Further, the Government of Canada announced its intention to host a knowledge exchange event to
bring together experts, partners, those with lived experiences, and stakeholders, to discuss the
current state of the science, including knowledge gaps, related to breast cancer screening. PHAC
worked with officials from Health Canada, the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, the
Canadian Partnership Against Cancer, the Canadian Cancer Society, the Canadian Breast
Screening Network, and the Canadian Public Health Association to plan the Knowledge Exchange
event which took place on September 26 and 27, 2023. A “What We Heard” report summarizing the
findings, including the diverse viewpoints and perspectives expressed during the event, was
published online on December 20, 2023, and shared with participants.
On November 15, 2023, the Task Force announced that the timeline for a draft guideline update
would be revised to Spring 2024. A change in timeline was necessary given the volume and
complexity of the evidence, which caused the evidence review and modelling teams supporting the
Task Force to require more time. This new timeline provides more time for the generation of a robust
and trustworthy evidence base, and allows the Task Force adequate time to evaluate this evidence
and make recommendations.
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
ISSUE
Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
KEY FACTS
Mandatory Canada Health Transfer deductions, totaling over $79M in respect of deductions for
medically-necessary services, were levied in March 2024.
Mandatory deductions are eligible for reimbursement provided the implicated province takes steps
to eliminate patient charges and the circumstances that led to them, within two years after the
deduction was taken. In March 2024, Health Canada authorized over $90 million in
reimbursements to provinces which had taken action to address the patient charges for which they
were previously deducted.
For provinces that received partial reimbursement of their deductions, additional reimbursement
can occur as actions are taken to fully eliminate patient charges.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government is firmly committed to Canada’s publicly funded health care system and the
principle that everyone deserves access to quality, accessible and universal health care.
The Government of Canada will work with provinces and territories to ensure that its significant ten-
year investment of close to $200 billion in health care funding to provinces and territories is used in
ways that respect the principles of the Canada Health Act.
The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care
services based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
This Government has demonstrated that it will uphold the Canada Health Act to ensure that
patients do not face barriers when accessing medically necessary care. Toward that end, Health
Canada continues to work with provinces and territories to eliminate patient charges for medically
necessary services. As a result of provincial and territorial action to address these patient charges,
Health Canada reimbursed over $90 million.
IF PRESSED ON MEMBERSHIP FEES AT PRIVATE PRIMARY CARE CLINICS
The Government of Canada does not support a two-tiered health care system where patients may
choose, or be required, to pay membership fees to access insured primary care services at clinics,
or to gain preferential access to those services. These fees are considered patient charges under
the Canada Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility criterion of the Act.
Whenever Health Canada becomes aware of clinics charging such fees, the Department engages
with their provincial or territorial counterparts, and works with them to eliminate these charges.
Most recently, Health Canada officials reached out to their counterparts in Alberta after media
reports suggested a clinic was charging membership fees as a condition of accessing insured
services and confirmed the province would be auditing these clinics.
IF PRESSED CANADA HEALTH TRANSFER DEDUCTIONS LEVIED TO QUEBEC IN MARCH 2024
In January 2024, Quebec acknowledged Health Canada’s estimate of patient charges for medically
necessary diagnostic services which occurred in fiscal year 2021-2022. As such, in March 2024,
Health Canada levied a Canada Health Transfer deduction in the same amount.
Due to efforts made by Quebec to improve access to publicly funded diagnostic services, Health
Canada made a partial reimbursement of the province’s March 2023 and March 2024, deductions.
Health Canada continues to work with the province to encourage them to eliminate patient charges
for medically necessary services, which would allow the province to be fully reimbursed for this
deduction.
BACKGROUND
Patient Charges for Medically Necessary Services Delivered Virtually and/or by Non-Physician
Health Care Providers
On March 9, 2023, former Minister of Health, Jean-Yves Duclos wrote to his PT counterparts to
express concerns about reports of patient charges for medically necessary services delivered
virtually and/or by non-physician health care providers that would be insured if delivered in-person
by a physician. Health Canada continues to engage with PTs on these issues.
Diagnostic Services Policy
The Diagnostic Services Policy confirmed the federal position that all medically necessary services,
including diagnostic MRI (Magnetic resonance imaging) and CT (computerized tomography scan)
services, are insured services, regardless of the venue where the services are delivered. Six
provinces currently allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic services.
Provinces and territories were required to report on patient charges for medically necessary
diagnostic services in December 2023. As a result of patient charges for these services, in March
2024,Health Canada levied $72,408,956 in mandatory dollar-for-dollar deductions from the
Canada Health Transfer payments of the implicated jurisdictions. As a result of provincial action to
address these patient charges, Health Canada has made reimbursements to several of these
jurisdiction, including full reimbursement to Manitoba which has eliminated patient charges.
Breakdowns by province are as follows:
British Columbia - $11,270,216 ($15,587,542 to be reimbursed);
Alberta - $20,450,175 ($20,538,796 to be reimbursed);Saskatchewan - $1,084,513;
Manitoba - $650 ($354,477 to be reimbursed);
Quebec - $36,014,132 ($46,728,814 to be reimbursed);
New Brunswick - $1,794,635; and
Nova Scotia - $1,794,635.
Membership/enrollment fees and private primary care clinics
Health Canada is aware of private primary care clinics in several provinces and territories (PTs) that
charge enrollment and annual membership fees of up to $7,200. These clinics offer members
access to insured primary care services, uninsured services (e.g., massage therapy and nutritional
services), as well as comprehensive health assessments, which combine insured and uninsured
services. Enrollment and membership fees at clinics staffed by enrolled physicians are considered
patient charges under the Canada Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility criterion of
the Act, if access to insured services is contingent or preferential on payment of these fees.
In December 2023, Health Canada reached out to Alberta officials after media reports flagged a
clinic charging membership fees in relation to accessing insured health services. Alberta has
confirmed that the province will be auditing all private clinics that have a membership component
to their services.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, evidence in Ontario confirmed that some private abortion clinics charged fees for
uninsured services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect
to accessing insured surgical abortion services. Since March 2021, deductions totaling $86,065
have been levied against ON’s CHT payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion
services.
Under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy provinces and territories that face mandatory
deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with Health Canada to develop a
plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the circumstances that led
to them within a specified timeframe. Ontario is in the process of implementing its Reimbursement
Action Plan to eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services. Due to the province’s
progress to date, including new legislation that prohibits patient charges for these services, in
March 2024, Health Canada made a partial reimbursement of the province’s March 2022, 2023, and
2024 deductions totalling $43,296.
Access to Abortion in New Brunswick
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of
surgical abortion services to approved hospitals. This means that individuals who received these
services at the private clinic in Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick was
the only province with a private abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province did not provide
coverage for services. Since March 2020, deductions totaling $444,041 have been levied against
the NB’s Canada Health Transfer (CHT) payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion
services. Clinic 554 closed in February 2024, but New Brunswick remains subject to Canada Health
Transfer deductions for patient charges levied through fiscal 2023-2024, for failing to provide
coverage for these services.
The Reimbursement Policy
Under the Canada Health Act (CHA) Reimbursement Policy, which came into effect in 2018,
provinces and territories that face mandatory deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if
they work with Health Canada to develop a plan to eliminate patient charges for medically
necessary services, and the circumstances that led to them. The plan must be successfully
implemented within a specified timeframe (under the Reimbursement Policy, and as outlined in
Section 25.01 of the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act, a province has up to two years
from the date of a deduction to be reimbursed).
CANNABIS
ISSUE
Since its coming into force on October 17, 2018, the Cannabis Act has created a strict legal
framework for controlling the production, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis across
Canada.
The legislation is designed to keep cannabis out of the hands of youth and profits out of the pockets
of organized crime by fostering a robust legal and regulated industry.
KEY FACTS
The legal cannabis market continues to displace the illicit market. According to Statistics Canada
data, the legal share of the value of cannabis consumed has steadily increased to 74% in the third
quarter of 2023, compared to just 9% prior to legalization.
KEY MESSAGES
Since 2018, our Government has implemented a robust public health approach to keeping
cannabis out of the hands of youth and ensuring adults have access to a quality-controlled and
regulated supply, while reducing the illicit market.
Since legalization, rates of use among youth have not changed significantly, and more Canadians
who consume cannabis are purchasing from legal retailers.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW OF THE CANNABIS ACT
Health Canada is pleased to have received the Expert Panel’s final report, and the Government has
tabled the report in Parliament on March 21, 2024.
Health Canada thanks Mr. Morris Rosenberg and members of the Expert Panel for their
commitment and dedication to leading the evidence-based and inclusive review of the Cannabis
Act.
Health Canada is carefully reviewing and analyzing the report and its recommendations.
The Panel’s findings will help inform Health Canada’s ongoing efforts to improve the operation and
administration of Canada’s cannabis control framework.
IF PRESSED ON THE REVIEW OF THE MEDICAL ACCESS REGIME
The Government actively monitors the medical access program and committed to evaluate the
framework within the legislative review of the Cannabis Act.
The Expert Panel considered the medical access program in their review and made
recommendations related to medical access.
Health Canada is carefully reviewing and analyzing the Expert Panel’s recommendations.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLAINTS REGARDING PERSONAL PRODUCTION WITH A HEALTH CANADA
AUTHORIZATION
Health Canada continues to take action to strengthen oversight and reduce the risk of abuse of the
program.
Under the Cannabis Regulations, Health Canada may refuse or revoke a registration on public
health or public safety grounds, including the risk of cannabis being diverted to an illicit market or
activity.
As of March 31, 2024, Health Canada has refused or revoked over 3,400 registrations under the
Cannabis Regulations, including 3,100 for reasons of public health and public safety.
IF PRESSED ON CANNABIS POISONINGS AMONG SENIORS
Health Canada is aware of a recent publication that examined cannabis-related poisonings among
older adults in Ontario.
Health Canada continues to regularly communicate with Canadians about the health risks
associated with cannabis and its use. For example, Health Canada has published resources that
outlines important facts to consider for adults over 55 when deciding whether to use cannabis.
The Department continues to monitor adverse reactions to cannabis among all Canadians,
including seniors, and publishes annual reports on adverse reactions to cannabis on its website.
Canadians using cannabis for medical purposes, especially seniors who may also be taking
medications at the same time, should consult with their healthcare provider prior to using cannabis
on an ongoing basis.
IF PRESSED ON THE RISE IN PAEDIATRIC CANNABIS POISONINGS
Health Canada is concerned about potential harms to children who accidentally consume
cannabis.
The Department issued a public advisory in December 2021, and updated the advisory in April 2022
and May 2023. The advisory includes guidance on how to recognize and react to accidental
cannabis consumption and poisoning.
In Spring 2023, Health Canada also launched a public education campaign to help prevent
accidental poisonings in children from edible cannabis.
Looking forward, Health Canada continues to educate Canadians on this important issue through
outreach efforts to healthcare providers and educators and will continue to monitor reports of
adverse reactions to cannabis.
IF PRESSED ON NON-COMPLIANT EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCTS THAT EXCEED THE REGULATORY
LIMIT FOR THC
The Cannabis Act and its regulations were designed first and foremost to protect public health and
public safety.
Health Canada is aware of non-compliance regarding edible cannabis products with
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) quantities that exceed the allowable 10 mg per container limit.
Health Canada is working with regulated parties to ensure that they understand and comply with
the regulatory requirements.
IF PRESSED ON ILLEGAL CANNABIS PRODUCTS TARGETED AT YOUTH
The Cannabis Act aims to protect youth from the risks of cannabis, including restricting promotion;
prohibiting products and packaging appealing to youth; and setting THC limits.
Illegal edible cannabis often mimics common snacks and candy, and may contain harmful levels of
contaminants and dangerously high levels of THC.
The Act gives law enforcement tools to crackdown on illegal sales, including those targeting youth.
Health Canada continues to educate Canadians to understand the difference between legal and
illegal cannabis and the health and safety risks.
IF PRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN
We invested in evidence-based campaigns to educate youth and young adults on risks and harms
of cannabis.
In 2018, Health Canada launched Pursue Your Passion, a campaign that visited high schools and
universities across the country.
The campaign has been updated to be a teacher-led presentation for youth to include information
on the different methods of consumption and effects of cannabis on mental health.
The Department also launched an updated version as a virtual, ambassador-led presentation,
visiting over 500 schools between March 2023 and March 2024.
The Department continues to work on additional efforts to educate youth and young adults on
cannabis, and more broadly, polysubstance use and mental health.
IF PRESSED ON ISRAEL INTIATING AN ANTI-DUMPING INVESTIGATION ON CANNABIS FOR
MEDICAL PURPOSES IMPORTED FROM CANADA
The import and export of cannabis for medical or scientific purposes is strictly regulated and
limited to states that are party to the UN drug conventions, and that have a legal framework for the
medical or scientific use of cannabis.
Health Canada’s import and export policy is consistent with Canada’s international obligations.
Health Canada strictly limits international trade of cannabis for medical and scientific purposes.
Health Canada supports Global Affairs Canada in their engagement with implicated Canadian
exporters.
BACKGROUND
The Cannabis Act
On October 17, 2018, the Cannabis Act came into force, implementing a new comprehensive
public health approach that is more effective in protecting youth and keeping profits out of the
pockets of criminals and organized crime.
The Cannabis Act creates a legal and regulatory framework for controlling the production,
distribution, sale and possession of cannabis in Canada. This framework was informed by the
recommendations of the Task Force on Cannabis Legalization and Regulation.
The Act restricts youth access to cannabis; prohibits promotions that are designed to encourage
youth to use cannabis; imposes serious criminal penalties on people who break the law, especially
those who import or export cannabis illegally, or provide cannabis to youth; establishes strict
product safety and quality requirements; reduces the burden on the criminal justice system;
provides for the legal production of cannabis; allows adults to possess and access regulated,
quality-controlled, legal cannabis; and, enhances public awareness of the health risks associated
with cannabis.
For example, the Regulations require plain packaging and labelling for all cannabis products with
restrictions on logos, colours, and branding. Cannabis products must be in packaged in a child-
resistant container and be labelled with the standardized cannabis symbol, the mandatory health
warning message, and include specific product information (e.g., delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) information).
Legislative Review
The Cannabis Act requires that the Minister initiate a review of the Act and its administration three
years following the coming into force of the Act (i.e., after October 17, 2021), and that a report of the
review’s findings be tabled before both Houses of Parliament within 18 months of the start of the
review.
The Cannabis Act further stipulates that the review must include an assessment of the impact of
the Cannabis Act on public health and, in particular, on: the health and consumption habits of
young persons in respect of cannabis use; Indigenous persons and communities; and, the
cultivation of cannabis plants in a dwelling-house.
On September 22, 2022, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
launched the legislative review of the Act. An Expert Panel, chaired by Morris Rosenberg, led the
review, and a report including findings or recommendations resulting from the review was tabled in
both Houses of Parliament on March 21, 2024.
The Expert Panel engaged broadly with governments, Indigenous peoples, youth, marginalized and
racialized communities, cannabis industry representatives and people who access cannabis for
medical purposes to gather perspectives on the implementation and administration of the Act. The
Expert Panel also met with experts in relevant fields, including, but not limited to, public health,
substance use, criminal justice, law enforcement and health care.
On October 10, 2023, the Expert Panel released their “What We Heard Report” which summarized
the perspectives shared by stakeholders as well as evidence related to each area of the review.
The department received the Expert Panel’s final report, which includes 54 recommendations and
11 observations. The department is conducting an analysis of the recommendations and
observations to understand their potential implications for the Cannabis Program. Over the coming
months, the department will work closely and collaboratively with other implicated federal
departments, provinces and territories, partners and stakeholders as next steps are considered.
The report includes recommendations related to:
Expanding efforts on prevention, research and public education;
Increasing policy and regulatory work for new and higher potency products;
Improving guidance for industry on promotion, packaging and labelling practices;
Creating new authorities to increase control for Indigenous communities over cannabis-related
activities, better supports and nation-to-nation agreements;
Accelerating work to reduce unnecessary regulatory burden, review of the excise tax regime, and
higher duties on higher potency products;
Improving supports for marginalized and racialized groups;
Establishing in-person pharmacy access option for the medical access program, improving clinical
guidance and continuing work to eliminate abuse of the program; and
Addressing organized crime, abuse of the personal and designated production program,
unauthorized on-reserve sales and illicit online sellers.
Medical Access Framework
Medical Regime
Health Canada administers a medical access program under the Cannabis Act and the Cannabis
Regulations.
Within the current regulatory framework, individuals who have an authorization from their health
care practitioner can access cannabis for medical purposes in one of the following ways:
purchase quality-controlled cannabis from a wide variety of federally licensed sellers inspected by
Health Canada;
produce an authorized amount of cannabis for their own medical purposes; or
designate someone to produce cannabis for them.
As of September 30, 2023, 188,301 patients were registered with federally licensed sellers (Note:
these are not always unique individuals as individuals may be registered with more than one
licensed seller, provided an original medical document was used with each registration).
As of December 31, 2023, 13,731 individuals were registered with Health Canada for personal and
designated production of cannabis for their own medical purposes.
Licensed cannabis producers must pay a federal excise duty when they package cannabis
products, including those sold to patients for medical purposes. Federal policies related to excise
duties on cannabis fall under the purview of the Minister of Finance.
Authorizations for personal or designated production
Personal and designated production are subject to regulatory requirements designed to ensure that
cannabis is consumed only with the approval and under the supervision of an authorized health
care practitioner.
Health Canada reviews all applications for personal or designated production to ensure that the
regulatory requirements are met. Health Canada also confirms that the health care practitioner is
authorized by—and in good standing with—the relevant provincial or territorial regulatory health
authority, and that the medical document is an original that has not been altered or falsified.
Once a registration certificate is issued, the personal or designated producer may not produce in
excess of the maximum limits outlined in a registration certificate and may not sell cannabis to any
person. Selling cannabis without authorization is a criminal offence.
A maximum of four registrations are permitted per production site. Only the individuals authorized
to produce cannabis for their own medical purposes, or the person designated to produce it for
them, can tend to the plants.
Health Canada has the ability to inspect a production site if it is not the registrant’s home to ensure
it is abiding by the terms set out in the individual’s registration certificate.
Accidental Paediatric Ingestion of Cannabis and Poisonings
Various sources of evidence indicate significant associations between cannabis legalization and
increases in cannabis-related emergency department visits, hospitalizations, intensive care unit
admissions and poison center calls, both in Canada and across many U.S. states.
These increases have been attributed to accidental ingestion of edible cannabis in those under 12
years old, and primarily by children younger than 5 ingesting cannabis whose source is unknown or
illegal. Illegal edible products – often referred to as ‘copycat’ products – resemble popular
confectionary products (e.g., Starbursts, Skittles) that come in colorful packaging and are
appealing to children. Further, illegal edible products can contain 100 mg of THC or more per
package, whereas legal cannabis products cannot exceed more than 10 mg of THC per package.
The 10 mg THC limit on legal edible cannabis products exists to protect against accidental
consumption, overconsumption and poisoning.
Since the coming into force of the Cannabis Act and its regulations, Health Canada monitors,
assesses and reports on adverse reactions associated with cannabis through the Canada Vigilance
Database. The findings are used to inform evidence-based information on health and safety risks
with cannabis, including risk communications and educational resources.
The Department issued a public advisory in December 2021, and updated the advisory in April 2022
and May 2023. The advisory reminds Canadians of the risk of serious harm should children
accidentally consume edible cannabis, particularly products that are illegal and unregulated. It
also helps to identify illegal ‘copycat’ edible cannabis products..
In Spring 2023, Health Canada also launched a public education campaign on the risks of
accidental cannabis poisonings in children and to provide information on how to help prevent
cannabis poisonings, what a poisoning looks like, and what to do if a cannabis poisoning is
suspected. In 2024, this campaign is expanding, reaching out to healthcare providers and early
childhood educators to effectively disseminate public education materials and enhance
awareness.
Israel Initiates an Anti-Dumping Investigation on Cannabis for Medical Purposes Imported from
Canada
On January 17, Israel initiated an anti-dumping investigation into cannabis for medical purposes
imported from Canada. The trade of cannabis for medical purposes is highly regulated and is done
in accordance with international obligations. Canada accounts for a large majority of Israel’s
imports, approximately 80% according to the Government of Israel. In 2023, 34 unique Canadian
licence holders obtained Health Canada export permits and exported 79 shipments to Israel. After
Australia, Israel is the second largest export market for Canadian cannabis (based on Canadian
cannabis exports in 2021, 2022 and 2023).
The Government of Canada’s engagement in an anti-dumping investigation is generally limited to
ensuring companies are informed and understand how to engage in the process, since the matters
involve the commercial practices of private entities.
The World Trade Organization Anti-Dumping Agreement allows members to impose an anti-
dumping duty in response to dumped imports that are found to be injuring or threatening to injure
their domestic industry. The Agreement also sets out the rules and procedures for conducting
investigations and applying anti-dumping duties (e.g., evidentiary standards, notification and
transparency requirements, timelines, rules for calculating dumping margins and applying duties,
and basis for determining injury). An anti-dumping duty is meant to offset the price advantage
caused by dumping.
ACCESS TO PEDIATRIC CARE AND MEDICINES
ISSUE
Access to children’s health services across the continuum of care remains an issue in Canada,
including lengthy backlogs for essential services such as surgical, diagnostic, mental health, and
children’s rehabilitation.
The Standing Committee on Health released a report on May 6, 2024, entitled Fostering Healthy
Childhoods: A Foundation for Resilient Generations. Among other recommendations, the report
calls for a national pediatric health care workforce strategy, the establishment of a national child
and youth commissioner, and a national pediatric health data strategy.
KEY FACTS
As of July 2023, two-thirds of patients at Ontario’s children’s hospitals have surpassed
recommended wait times for surgery. The situation is similar across the country. In Nova Scotia,
2,500 pediatric patients are waiting for surgery, with 40% waiting beyond the recommended
window.
There are not enough health care workers to meet the current demand for services. Nearly 14.5% of
Canadians do not have a primary health care provider. Without a primary health care provider,
emergency rooms become the only accessible option for children and youth seeking health care.
Almost two thirds of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25, with nearly half emerging
before 18. Children and youth are among the highest users of Emergency Departments (ED) for
mental health and substance use services.
Children are waiting longer than medically recommended for surgical procedures and mental
health supports, causing delays that can lead to short-term and long-term complications, including
a worsening of symptoms, more complicated procedures, disabilities and developmental changes.
Experts and advocates like Children’s Healthcare Canada are calling for a national child health
strategy, a national children’s health officer and dedicated funding for child health, as well as
funding for robust maternal, child, and youth health research. Most recently, the Standing
Committee on Health released its Fostering Healthy Childhoods report, which reiterates many of
these recommendations.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is committed to improving the health and wellbeing of Canada’s
children.
Through the Government’s plan, “Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians,” the
Government of Canada is investing close to $200 billion over 10 years for health care, including $44
billion in new funding to provinces and territories improve health care services for Canadians
across the country. We continue to work closely with provinces and territories on our shared health
priorities, including:
Access to family health services,
Supported health workers and reduced backlogs,
Access to mental health and substance use services, and
Modernizing health systems.
The Government of Canada also continues to work collaboratively with stakeholders through
initiatives such as the Pediatric Drug Action Plan, to make sure that parents and caregivers have the
drugs that are necessary to take care of their children.
The Government is reviewing the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Health carefully.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ABOUT INCREASING AND MAINTAINING SUPPLY OF HEALTHCARE
WORKERS
$25 billion over 10 years will advance shared health priorities, including supporting our health
workers and reducing backlogs, through tailored bilateral agreements with provinces and
territories.
In addition, funding of $1.7 billion will support hourly wage increases for personal support workers
and related professions, as federal, provincial and territorial governments work together on how to
best support the recruitment and retention of these workers.
Budget 2024 proposes to provide $77.1 million over four years, starting in 2025-26, to address
critical health human resource supply challenges. This funding will support the integration of
internationally educated health care professionals (IEHPs) into Canada’s health workforce by
reducing barriers and addressing critical gaps in training opportunities.
These investments will accelerate efforts already underway with provinces and territories to
support the recruitment and retention of health workers within the public health care system.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT THE HEALTH PORTFOLIO IS DOING TO MONITOR RESPIRATORY ILLNESSES
AND HOSPITAL CAPACITY
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) continues to closely monitor respiratory infections,
including RSV and influenza in Canada.
Since the 2022 surge in respiratory illnesses, Health Canada has taken steps to develop, with the
help of the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), a mechanism to monitor pediatric bed
and ventilator utilization in Canada.
Since January 2024, CIHI has been receiving weekly data on ICU admissions from 9 pediatric
hospitals, including British Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario. This data accounts for 68 per cent of
pediatric intensive care beds across Canada. These reports and near real-time data on pediatric
hospital capacity will allow us to better anticipate and react to respiratory virus surges.
IF PRESSED ON THE PEDIATRIC DRUG ACTION PLAN
Health Canada’s initial priorities under the Pediatric Drug Action Plan include implementing a pilot
for the submission of pediatric development plans and studies, and the development of a National
Priority List of Pediatric Drugs (NPLPD).
The pilot program was launched in February 2024 and is designed to encourage sponsors to submit
pediatric development plans and studies to Health Canada. The purpose of the pilot is to collect
data and to better understand the pediatric landscape in the Canadian context. Having this
information will inform pediatric policy and help Health Canada make the appropriate regulatory
decisions in the future.
We are also working to develop a National Priority List of Pediatric Drugs, which will help us identify
drugs with pediatric indications and formulations and address unmet pediatric drug needs in
Canada. This initiative is being informed by pediatric medical practitioners and the pharmacist
community across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTING THE MENTAL HEALTH OF CHILDREN AND YOUTH
Our government recognizes the unique mental health needs of children and youth and is deeply
committed to their well-being.
We are working with partners, including provinces and territories, to ensure children and youth have
access to mental health supports now and in the long-term where and when they need them.
For example, in Budget 2024, we’ve committed to introduce a new Youth Mental Health Fund that
will provide $500M over five years to help community health organizations provide enhanced care
for younger Canadians.
We are also supporting the development and expansion of Integrated Youth Services, which provide
a “one-stop shop” of supports in the community for youth.
IF PRESSED ON THE HESA COMMITTEE REPORT ON CHILDREN’S HEALTH
The Standing Committee on Health tabled its study on children’s health and adopted the report,
titled “Fostering Health Childhoods: A Foundation for Resilient Generations”.
Health Canada is grateful for the work of the Committee in studying this important issue and for the
witnesses who participated and offered their expertise in support of this report.
Our government acknowledges the issues highlighted in the report, including long wait times for
surgeries and access to mental health services, access to pediatric drug formulations, and
declining physical activity rates, among others. We are committed to working together to advance
collective action to address these issues and improve children’s health across the country.
Health Canada is reviewing the recommendations of the Committee carefully to inform our work,
and will be developing a response to the recommendations.
BACKGROUND
Health System Capacity
The children’s healthcare system is drastically undersized to deal with the increased demand
placed on children’s health services. Access to children’s health services across the continuum of
care remains an issue in Canada, including lengthy backlogs for essential services such as surgical,
diagnostic, mental health, and children’s rehabilitation. Children now wait longer than adults for
many essential and time sensitive healthcare interventions.
Children and youth have unique health needs that must be considered and measured, requiring
system-wide solutions, investments and planning across all levels of government to ensure the
best possible outcomes for children’s physical and psychological health and development.
Surges in Respiratory Illness in the Pediatric Population
In 2022, there was higher than usual activity and healthcare demand due to many factors, including
COVID-19, seasonal flu and RSV, as well as increased susceptibility to illness due to limited
exposure to other respiratory illnesses during COVID-19. Higher than usual RSV activity in children
was observed in fall 2022.
During the surge, Canada saw an increased use of emergency care due to the uptake of respiratory
illnesses in children. The 2022 fall surge forced hospitals to pause other services, including
surgeries, further exacerbating wait times. For example, across four pediatric hospitals in Ontario,
11,789 children have yet to receive necessary surgeries and about half of these children have been
waiting beyond the clinically recommended wait times.
Trends observed during the 2023-2024 indicated COVID-19, seasonal flu and RSV were co-
circulating. However, influenza-associated hospitalizations remain in the low activity range. This
season (from October 1, 2023, to April 27, 2024), 1,084 influenza-associated pediatric
hospitalizations were reported.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) continues to closely monitor respiratory infections:
As of mid-April 2024, most COVID-19 indicators remain at low levels in Canada.
At the national level, indicators of influenza activity are decreasing and are within or below
expected levels typical of this time of year.
RSV percent positivity is stable and below peak levels recorded in December 2023.
In anticipation of the 2024-25 respiratory illness season, the Public Health Agency of Canada
continues monitoring current respiratory virus trends in the southern hemisphere to anticipate
potential trends for Canada's next respiratory season.
Monitoring of pediatric health capacity
Since the 2022 fall surge, the Government of Canada has been working collaboratively with
children’s health leaders and the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) to address
significant data gaps in pediatric health capacity monitoring. As of January 2024, CIHI has been
receiving weekly data on ICU admissions and occupancy from 9 pediatric hospitals in BC, AB, and
ON. This accounts for activity across 173 pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) beds or 68% of PICU
beds across Canada. These weekly summary reports are intended to support: provision of near-real
time data on PICU capacity and utilization across Canada; information sharing amongst
participating pediatric hospitals; trend analysis and predictive analytics; emerging priorities for
pediatric populations; and rapid response to inquiries related to utilization and capacity issues
across multiple hospitals. The near-time data can function as a signal for in-depth analyses to
better anticipate and react to respiratory virus surges.
Supply of Pediatric Medications
Since the 2022 respiratory surge, the supply of pediatric analgesics products has stabilized, and
products are readily available at community and hospital pharmacies. As a result of challenges
related to enabling access to safe and effective pediatric drugs in Canada, many drugs are being
prescribed to children off-label, meaning they are prescribed outside of their approved use set out
in the drug’s product monograph.
Pediatric Drug Action Plan
In 2020, following consultation with stakeholders, Health Canada developed a Pediatric Drug
Action Plan (PDAP) to address the prescription of off-label drugs to children, with the ultimate
vision that children and youth (0-17 years) in Canada have access to the medicines they need in
age-appropriate formulations.
The three main goals of the PDAP are:
Increasing the development of pediatric medicines and formulations;
Improving access to pediatric medicines and formulations; and
Providing more information to Canadians.
Implementation of the PDAP is expected to continue over the next five or more years. Current
priorities include:
Implementing a “pediatric pilot” to help bring Health Canada into alignment with other jurisdictions
in requiring pediatric studies to be completed and submitted when it is expected that a drug will be
used in the pediatric population. This pilot was launched on February 26, 2024, and will be used to
collect data and to better understand the pediatric drug submission landscape in Canada;
Working with pediatricians across Canada to develop a National Priority List of drugs that are
needed for the pediatric population.
Identifying the regulatory pathways and flexibilities that can be offered to bring these products to
Canada.
Improving access to medicines for pediatric populations is a global issue requiring international
collaboration. Health Canada is also working across the health portfolio, other government
departments, and with our external national and global partners, including the Regulatory
Cooperation Forum and the World Health Organization Pediatric Regulatory Network, on key
initiatives related to pediatric drugs.
Federal Investments in Healthcare
Budget 2024 confirms the federal government’s plan to provide close to $200 billion over ten years
in health transfers to provinces and territories. This includes $44 billion in new funding through new
Canada Health Transfer measures, tailored bilateral agreements to meet the needs of each
province and territory, funding for personal support workers, and an increase to the Territorial
Health Investment Fund.
Budget 2024 also proposed $77.1 million over four years, starting in 2025-2026 to effectively
integrate internationally educated health care professionals into Canada’s health workforce by
creating 120 medical residency training positions, increasing assessment capacity and providing
support to navigate credential recognition systems.
Canada Health Transfer Top-Up: In June 2023 the federal government provided provinces and
territories $2 billion to address urgent pressures in emergency rooms, operating rooms, and
pediatric hospitals, building on $6.5 billion in top-ups provided throughout the pandemic.
Canada Health Transfer Growth Guarantee: A 5% CHT growth guarantee for the next five years,
resulting in a permanent funding increase (expected value of %15.3 billion over 10 years).
Tailored Bilateral Agreements: The federal government will provide $25 billion over ten years
through a new set of bilateral agreements to address individual provincial and territorial health
system needs, such as expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and
reducing backlogs, increasing mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health
systems.
Federal Investments in Access to Mental Healthcare
Across Canada, children and youth are reporting decreases in their overall mental health. In 2020,
over 35,000 children and youth were hospitalized for mental health disorders – almost 1 in 4 of all
hospitalizations for children and youth. Children and youth are among the highest users of
Emergency Departments for mental health and substance use services.
$500M for the new Youth Mental Health Fund was announced in Budget 2024. The Fund will be
designed and delivered in a manner that complements other investments in youth mental health
and mental health more broadly.
Significant progress has been made in expanding the availability of Integrated Youth Services hubs
across Canada. There are now approximately 90 hubs across Canada with over 50 more in
development. All 13 provinces and territories have developed or are developing an Integrated Youth
Services network and a pan-Canadian Indigenous IYS network in progress.
In November 2023 the Government of Canada announced Canada’s new, national three-digit
number, 988, for suicide prevention and emotional distress. Funded by the Government of the
Government of Canada and led by the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 988 will be available
to everyone by phone and text, in both official languages, and accessible 24 hours a day and seven
days a week.
HESA Study on Children’s Health
The Standing Committee on Health (HESA) passed a motion on February 9, 2022 to undertake a
study on children’s health and the impact of the pandemic on children’s health outcomes. HESA
completed a study report in the spring of 2024 titled “Fostering Health Childhoods: A Foundation
for Resilient Generations”, detailing recommendations for the government. The report outlines the
committee’s findings and offers 27 recommendations on how the federal government can take
immediate action, in collaboration with provinces, territories and stakeholders, to foster healthy
childhoods in Canada.
Key initiatives recommended in the report include: developing a national pediatric health care
workforce strategy; implementing policies to improve access to pediatric drug formulations;
expanding access to mental health and substance use services for children, adolescents and
young adults; investing in programs that encourage healthy eating and physical activity among
children; ensuring full implementation of Jordan’s Principle and the Spirit Bear Plan; establishing a
national child and youth commissioner; and developing a national pediatric health data strategy.
Health Canada is reviewing the recommendations of the Committee carefully to inform our work
towards a Government response.
CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
ISSUE
The Government of Canada is working to build resiliency to the impacts of climate change on health
and the health system.
KEY FACTS
Climate change is already negatively impacting the health of people in Canada and the health
systems they rely on.
In June 2023, the Government of Canada launched the National Adaptation Strategy. The Strategy is
supported by the Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan.
To implement the Strategy and Plan, the federal government announced $42.9M to Health Canada
over five years (2023-24 to 2027-28) to fund programs that will support the health sector and people
in Canada to adapt to a changing climate.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is committed to taking action to protect the health of people in Canada
from the impacts of climate change.
The Government of Canada is working with partners to address the health impacts of climate
change through the National Adaptation Strategy and Government of Canada Adaptation Action
Plan, which includes up to $43 million in new federal funding to advance efforts to protect health
from extreme heat and build climate resilient and low-carbon health systems.
MESSAGES CLÉS
Le gouvernement du Canada est déterminé à prendre des mesures pour protéger la santé de la
population canadienne contre les effets du changement climatique.
Le gouvernement du Canada collabore avec ses partenaires pour faire face aux effets des
changements climatiques sur la santé dans le cadre de la Stratégie nationale d’adaptation et du
Plan d’action pour l’adaptation du gouvernement du Canada, qui comprend jusqu’à 43 millions de
dollars en nouveau financement fédéral pour faire progresser les efforts visant à protéger la santé
contre la chaleur extrême et à mettre en place des systèmes de santé résilients aux changements
climatiques et à faible émission de carbone.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT ARE WE DOING ABOUT WILDFIRES
Last year, the Health Portfolio worked effectively with federal partners to support
provincial/territorial (PT) and local responses during the wildfire season.
The Portfolio is preparing early for the upcoming wildfire season, holding portfolio-wide planning
meetings to prepare for the wildfire season, updating public health guidance documents, and
providing support to PTs and Indigenous Services Canada on wildfire smoke health effects and
ways to reduce exposure.
Health Canada is equipped to respond to emergency requests for air quality monitoring assistance
and can provide guidance to PTs on the use of small sensors, data interpretation and health
messaging during wildfire smoke events.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT ARE THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HEALTH PORTFOLIO ON WILDFIRES
The Health Portfolio is responsible for developing public health guidance, conducting surveillance,
providing public health surge capacity, and, through the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile,
responding to requests for assistance for surge assets such as cots, blankets, and masks.
Through its Air Quality Program, the Health Portfolio provides air quality monitoring surge capacity
and leads the development of messaging related to the impacts of wildfire smoke on air quality and
health, including the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI).
BACKGROUND
The World Health Organization (WHO) has called climate change the biggest global public health
threat of the 21st century. People in Canada are already feeling the effects of climate change on
their health, including from severe events like heatwaves, wildfires, floods and droughts and the
expansion of infectious diseases including vector-borne diseases, like Lyme disease, into Canada.
In June 2023, the Government of Canada released the final National Adaptation Strategy (NAS) and
supporting Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan (GOCAAP). The Strategy lays out an
agreed-upon framework to reduce the risk of climate-related disasters, improve health outcomes,
protect nature and biodiversity, build and maintain resilient infrastructure, and support a strong
economy and workers.
To implement the NAS and GOCAAP Health Canada will invest up to $43 million over the next five
years (2023-24 to 2027-28) to fund programs that will support the health sector and people in
Canada to adapt to a changing climate. These investments will help protect individuals from
existing and emerging health risks caused by climate change and build health systems that adapt
and adjust to our changing climate. For example, this includes supporting resilient and low-carbon
health systems that can respond to the health risks posed by the changing climate such as extreme
heat. Through the framework of the National Adaptation Strategy, Health Canada will renew and
expand existing health programs, including the HealthADAPT program and efforts to protect the
health of people in Canada from extreme heat, including extreme indoor heat which is the greatest
cause of heat-related injuries and death in Canada. These initiatives address the health effects of
climate change and advance actions to protect the population from extreme heat, a growing and
urgent health risk.
ADDRESSING DIABETES IN CANADA
ISSUE
Diabetes is a serious chronic disease, and one of the most common chronic diseases affecting
people in Canada. Diabetes poses many challenges for those living with the disease, their families,
and communities, and has various implications for health systems. It is a major cause of blindness,
kidney failure, heart attack, stroke and lower limb amputation.
KEY FACTS
Diabetes is a serious, lifelong condition characterized by the body's inability to produce enough
insulin or when the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces.
Approximately 3.7 million people in Canada are living with the disease and more than 200,000 new
cases are diagnosed each year.
There are three main types of diabetes: type 1, type 2, and gestational diabetes. Other types are
uncommon. Type 2 diabetes accounts for approximately 90% of diabetes cases in adults in
Canada. A variety of factors influence the development of type 2 diabetes, including age, genetics,
modifiable lifestyle risk factors, and intersecting social, economic, and environmental
determinants of health.
The onset of type 2 diabetes can be prevented or delayed by reducing the major modifiable risk
factors, such as unhealthy diets and physical inactivity, as well as addressing the determinants of
health that influence one’s ability to take action on these modifiable risk factors.
Some people in Canada, such as First Nations and Métis people, people of African descent, and
South and East Asian descent, and people with lower income and education levels have higher
rates of type 2 diabetes compared to the general population.
KEY MESSAGES
In October 2022, the Framework for Diabetes in Canada was released, marking an important
milestone to better support Canadians.
Through Budget 2021 we committed $20 million to research through the Juvenille Diabetes
Research Foundation and Canadian Institutes for Health Research (JDRF-CIHR) Partnership to
Defeat Diabetes, including $15 million matched by JDRF.
On February 29, 2024, the Government introduced new legislation (Bill C-64), that lays a path
towards the first phase of national universal pharmacare in Canada. This includes a fund to help
Canadians manage and monitor their diabetes and administer their medication.
IF PRESSED
Through Budget 2021, we are investing $25 million over five years in research, surveillance and
prevention.
In November 2023, we announced the Type 2 Diabetes Prevention Challenge semi-finalists.
We continue to invest $20 million annually in community-based health promotion projects that
help prevent chronic diseases, including diabetes.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare outlines the Government of Canada’s plan to ensure
universal, single-payer coverage for a range of contraception and diabetes medications.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada continues to advance work on diabetes since the release of the
Framework for Diabetes in Canada in October 2022. The Framework provides common policy
direction to help align efforts and to support improved access to prevention and treatment for all
types of diabetes to ensure better health outcomes.
PHAC supports community-based initiatives to improve healthy behaviours and address health
inequalities among priority populations at greater risk of developing chronic diseases. PHAC’s
Healthy Canadians and Communities Fund invests approximately $20 million annually to support
projects that focus on behavioural risk factors.
On November 1, 2023, the Minister of Health announced 20 semi-finalists selected to receive a
$35,000 prize for proposing the most promising concept as part of the first-stage of the Type 2
Diabetes Prevention Challenge.
In June 2023, PHAC announced $998,450 in funding over three years for Diabetes Canada to
advance the Framework for Diabetes in Canada, working with key partners to develop an inventory
of successful diabetes initiatives to support their subsequent dissemination and adoption.
An Indigenous-led engagement process that will help identify priorities and ways forward to
address diabetes among Indigenous Peoples is underway with Indigenous organizations. The
process is being coordinated by the National Indigenous Diabetes Association.
The Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) is supporting diabetes research to improve
primary prevention, develop effective treatments and ultimately cure all types of diabetes. From
2018-19 to 2022-23, CIHR invested over $248 million in research related to diabetes. Through
Budget 2021, CIHR received $20M, $15M of which was matched by JDRF, to support diabetes
research through CIHR’s 100 Years of Insulin: Accelerating Canadian Discoveries to Defeat
Diabetes initiative.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, is an important step forward to improve health equity,
affordability, and outcomes and has the potential of long-term savings to the health care system.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
ISSUE
Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life-threatening. With
few or no treatment options, available treatments can be high-cost, which poses significant
challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of public
and private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
KEY FACTS
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are
often genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need through government drug
plans, through private drug plans, or by paying out of pocket. Many drugs for rare diseases are very
expensive and patients generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
The 2019 Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
recommended for the Canadian government to develop a formal National Strategy for Drugs for
Rare Diseases.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, commits to maintaining long-term funding for provinces,
territories and Indigenous Peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products, beginning with the funding announced for the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases.
KEY MESSAGES
On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three
years.
We are implementing this Strategy by working with provinces and territories towards the
development of bilateral agreements. Funding for the bilateral agreements will be available April 1,
2024 and run until March 31, 2027.
These bilateral agreements will help increase access and improve affordability of effective drugs for
rare diseases to improve the health of patients across Canada.
Further, funding to the Canadian Institutes for Health Information (CIHI) and Canadian Agency for
Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) is improving the collection and use of evidence to
support decision-making.
Funding to the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) is advancing rare disease research.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ON PROGRESS OF BILATERAL AGREEMENTS
Discussions with provinces and territories are underway to jointly determine a small set of new and
emerging drugs, which will be cost-shared and covered in a consistent way across Canada, for the
benefit of patients.
Funding for the bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories will start on April 1, 2024
and run for three years until March 31, 2027.
Funding has also gone to support eligible First Nations and Inuit patients living with rare diseases,
through Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
IF PRESSED ON HOW 2023-24 BILATERAL AGREEMENT FUNDS HAVE BEEN SPENT
Funding for the bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories will start on April 1, 2024
and run for three years until March 31, 2027.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC’S PARTICIPATION IN THE NATIONAL STRATEGY
Our Government is working with all provinces and territories to help increase access to, and
affordability of, promising and effective drugs for rare diseases to improve the health of patients
across Canada, while also providing flexibility for jurisdictions to address their own unique
circumstances.
All provinces and territories have been invited to engage all steps in the implementation of the
Strategy, including jointly determining a small set of new and emerging drugs that would be cost-
shared and covered in a consistent way.
They have also been engaged to share in the other pillars of the Strategy: the benefits of
collaborative approaches to the collection and use of evidence and innovation and research.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ON STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION THROUGH THE IMPLEMENTATION
ADVISORY GROUP
An Implementation Advisory Group was launched in October 2023 to support the implementation
of the National Strategy from a patient-centered perspective and to help improve consistent access
and affordability of effective drugs for rare diseases across the country.
The Implementation Advisory Group is comprised of individuals drawn from a range of perspectives
and roles, including patients, caregivers, clinicians, and industry.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING TO HEALTH SYSTEM PARTNERS
We are working with our partners, including the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technology in
Health (CADTH), the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), and the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (CIHR) to focus on collection and use of evidence to support decision making
and to advance rare disease research.
For example, CADTH’s new newborn screening expert panel will develop guidance to foster greater
consistency and timelier access to treatments.
CIHR is providing $20M over 5 years to the Maternal Infant Child and Youth Research Network
(MICYRN) to build a National Pediatric Rare Disease Clinical Trials and Treatment Network.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN PATIENTS WILL SEE BENEFITS FROM THE STRATEGY
Funding for the bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories will start on April 1, 2024
and run for three years until March 31, 2027
Funding to health system partners has already begun, and is now helping to improve the collection
and use of evidence to support decision-making, and advancing rare disease research and
treatment networks.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE STRATEGY IS ALIGNED WITH THE PHARMACARE ACT
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, commits to maintaining long-term funding for provinces,
territories and Indigenous Peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products, beginning with the funding announced for the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases.
The National Strategy is intended to be part of continuing progress towards national universal
pharmacare and is a concrete expression of the principles set out in the pharmacare bill.
Through the National Strategy we are addressing the issue of access and universal coverage by
addressing the issue of the “postal code lottery” for DRD identified in national consultations. We
are also focusing on affordability and high costs of DRD that leave patients financially vulnerable,
and addressing appropriate use through supporting improvements in the use and generation of real
world evidence.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are
often genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the
world. They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a
handful of individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare
disease.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can be high-cost. Treatments for rare diseases are
often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases, or drugs for rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of
patients, small market size, and lack of competitors.
The Government of Canada is working with Provinces and Territories as an active member of the
pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying
power to negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including drugs for rare
diseases.
ACCESS TO DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government drug
plans, through private drug plans, or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive,
patients generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in clinical
trials, or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where
criteria are met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to
drugs that are unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are
for the treatment of rare diseases.
LAUNCH OF THE FIRST PHASE OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
The Minister of Health announced the launch of the first phase of the National Strategy for Drugs for
Rare Diseases on March 22, 2023, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three years, to
improve access to treatments for people living with a rare disease.
As part of this first phase, the Government of Canada will provide up to $1.4 billion over three years
to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements. This federal investment will increase
access to safe and effective drugs for Canadians with rare diseases. Provinces and territories will
be able to add new drugs to their formularies and increase coverage of existing drugs. The new
funding will also enable provinces and territories to improve screening and diagnostics so that
patients with a rare disease have a better chance of getting access to effective treatments at the
right time, which can mean significantly better health and overall quality of life for patients and their
families.
In addition, the Government of Canada is providing up to $33 million over three years to Indigenous
Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program to support eligible First Nations and Inuit
clients with rare diseases.
The Government of Canada is also making key investments of up to $68 million to support
collaborative governance, data infrastructure, and research for drugs for rare diseases. $20 million
over three years is being provided to the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health and
the Canadian Institute for Health Information to improve the collection and use of evidence to
support decision-making. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research are receiving $32 million over
five years to advance a rare disease research agenda with a focus on developing better diagnostic
tools and establishing a robust Canadian rare disease clinical trials network. $16 million over three
years, starting in 2023, is being invested to support the establishment of national governance
structures, such as a Health Canada secretariat and a stakeholder Implementation Advisory Group
The Government of Canada will continue working with provinces and territories, health system
partners, and stakeholders, including patients, families, and clinicians, to develop future actions
based on lessons learned as part of these actions included in the first phase of the Strategy.
NATIONAL PHARMACARE LEGISLATION
The 2019 Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
recommended for the Canadian government to develop a formal National Strategy for Drugs for
Rare Diseases.
Budget 2019 announced federal investments to move forward on a number of foundational
elements of national pharmacare, including the creation of the National Strategy, as well as the
development of a national formulary, and the creation of the Canadian Drug Agency.
The National Strategy is intended to be part of continuing progress towards a national universal
pharmacare program. It continues to be a crucial part of the government’s commitment to long-
term funding to improve the accessibility and affordability of drugs.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, commits to maintaining long-term funding for provinces,
territories and Indigenous Peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products, beginning with the funding announced for the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases.
CURRENT COVID POSTURE AND PREPAREDNESS
UPDATE ON BUDGET PROPOSAL
Budget 2024 announced $18.2 million over five years and $3.7 million a year ongoing to stabilize
funding for the Travelling Public Program (TPP).
The TPP is important in mitigating public health risks to protect the health of people travelling into
and out of Canada by preventing the introduction and spread of communicable diseases. Officers
are responsible for conducting inspections and overseeing the provision of safe food and potable
water, as well as maintenance of appropriate sanitation levels on passenger conveyances and their
ancillary industries such as flight kitchens and food caterers.
ISSUE
The SARS-CoV-2 virus will continue to circulate and evolve worldwide for the foreseeable future.
PHAC continues to work in collaboration with the WHO, international partners, provinces and
territories, and health care organizations to transition critical emergency response activities to
longer-term, sustainable COVID-19 prevention, control, and management.
KEY FACTS
As expected, SARS-CoV-2 has been co-circulating with other respiratory viruses such as seasonal
influenza (flu) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) this fall/winter. COVID-19 activity has not yet
demonstrated an observable seasonal trend.
Nationally, most COVID-19 indicators continue to slowly decrease or remain at low levels and
national test percent positivity has been decreasing since mid-December 2023.
Recent international reports indicate that COVID-19 activity continues to decrease in the US,
Europe, and UK.
As with other health emergencies, the unpredictable nature of infectious disease pandemics
necessitates ongoing action to support prevention and preparedness. Therefore, Canada’s
response, which includes vaccination programs, the promotion of personal protective measures,
and continued efforts to expand pandemic preparedness capacity and medical countermeasures
supply strategies, will need to continue to adapt.
KEY MESSAGES
Protecting the health and safety of Canadians remains a top priority for the Government of Canada
and this includes ensuring preparedness for future pandemics and global health events.
The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that a collaborative response is crucial to address public
health threats and to keep Canadians safe.
Investments made during the pandemic have increased Canada’s ability to plan for and respond to
viral respiratory threats and other public health emergencies.
IF PRESSED ON WORK BEING DONE ON PANDEMIC PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE TO
LESSONS LEARNED
The Government of Canada is taking all lessons learned into account to be prepared for potential
future pandemics. These efforts will build on significant investments made in response to COVID-
19. We are committed to continue working together with the provinces and territories towards a
sustainable and integrated approach to public health that will promote health, prevent disease and
better protect Canadians against future public health threats.
In 2022, we announced the creation of a Centre for Research on Pandemic Preparedness and
Health Emergencies at the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to develop and mobilize health
research for pandemic and health emergency preparedness, prevention, response, and recovery.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, to address the lack of available domestic manufacturing capacity,
we invested $1.2B to re-build Canada’s vaccine, therapeutics and biomanufacturing capacity right
here at home. In 2021, we doubled-down on progress made to provide $2.2B toward implementing
the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy, made up of five pillars including strong and
coordinated governance, strengthening research systems and talent pipeline, continued growth in
the domestic biomanufacturing supply chain, building public capacity including the Biologics
Manufacturing Centre (BMC), and enabling innovation by ensuring work class regulation.
On February 23, 2024, Moderna announced the completion of a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine
manufacturing facility in Laval, Quebec, to strengthen the domestic biomanufacturing sector and
pandemic preparedness.
In 2021, the Public Health Agency of Canada established the Centre for Integrated Risk Assessment
to bolster the Agency’s public health risk assessment capacity to anticipate, detect, and assess
potential public health risks to Canadians.
Our National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) is well stocked and we continue to engage with
our provincial and territorial partners on developing a comprehensive management plan that will
provide a roadmap for systematic and agile transformation of the NESS.
PHAC continues to monitor vaccination coverage using reports from provinces and territories and
surveys. During the COVID-19 vaccination campaign, PHAC and its provincial and territorial
partners were able to ramp up the Canadian COVID-19 Vaccination Coverage Surveillance System
(CCVCSS) to monitor and report weekly on COVID-19 vaccination coverage, so we would be able to
do the same should a new mass vaccination campaign be necessary.
The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to work with federal, provincial, and territorial
partners to improve our collective governance and work on the development of shared priorities,
such as modernizing the health system with data and digital tools.
IF PRESSED ON THE GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH INGELLIENCE NETWORK (GPHIN)
PHAC has created a plan to respond to all 36 recommendations proposed by the GPHIN
Independent Review Panel in May 2021, aiming for full implementation by March 2025, while also
addressing recommendations outlined in the Auditor General Report concerning GPHIN.
The Public Health Agency of Canada has already achieved tangible improvements in various
aspects of GPHIN, including its online platform and products, investing in workforce development,
vision, mission, and mandate, as well as subscriber outreach efforts.
The Public Health Agency of Canada has also improved the functions of the Global Public Health
Intelligence Network (GPHIN) by improving GPHIN reporting, strengthening collaboration with
provincial, territorial and international partners, and modernizing the GPHIN platform.
IF PRESSED ON EXISTING PREPAREDNESS FRAMEWORKS AND PLANS
The Auditor General recognized that the Public Health Agency of Canada had developed plans to
guide a response to a pandemic and building on this, updated plans should incorporate lessons
learned.
In October 2023, a revised Health Portfolio Emergency Response Plan (HP ERP) was published,
which incorporates learnings from COVID-19 and other public health emergencies. The Agency
tested the revised Plan and its preparedness posture to the Avian Influenza H5Nx in October 2023.
The Agency continues to test and adapt its emergency management plans and processes informed
by lessons learned, through exercises including Exercise ‘H5Nx Vigilance 2023’ for avian influenza,
and Exercise “Fire and Lightning 2024” in preparation for the 2024 wildfire season, as well as
through real public health events such as the outbreak of mpox, and the 2023 wildfire season.
Lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic response and other recent public health events are
informing Canada’s ongoing preparedness and response, including the need to revitalize and
expand pandemic preparedness planning for Canada by leveraging the Canadian Pandemic
Influenza Preparedness: Planning Guidance for the Health Sector (CPIP) and lessons learned to
develop Canada’s Pandemic Preparedness Plan (CPPP). Consultations are complete and work
towards Canada’s Pandemic Preparedness plan has been initiated.
The Agency is working with partners, including the provinces and territories, to incorporate lessons
and practical application from the COVID-19 experience, among others, to support a robust
approach to emergency management for future health emergencies.
IF PRESSED ON WASTEWATER SURVEILLANCE
The Public Health Agency of Canada worked in collaboration with other federal departments, and
provincial, territorial, and municipal governments as well as academic partners to establish a pan-
Canadian wastewater surveillance network for timely detection and monitoring of viral signals as
well as emerging COVID-19 variants of interest and concern.
Wastewater surveillance in Canada currently covers approximately 50% of the Canadian
population on a sewer system. Data from this program has successfully detected new and
emerging COVID-19 variants circulating in Canadian communities and continues to monitor
COVID-19 trends, which has been critical to informing public health responses. In addition to the
COVID-19 pathogen data, the national wastewater database now includes data for other pathogens
such as Influenza, RSV, and mpox.
The Agency continues to track and compare COVID-19 levels in some large urban centers and
northern, remote, and isolated communities across Canada.
The Agency and its partners have also established a pilot project at three Canadian airports to
sample wastewater from airport terminals and pooled aircraft wastewater depots to monitor for
new or emerging COVID-19 variants coming into Canada from various regions of the world.
BACKGROUND
While the world continues to learn and apply lessons learned for the management of COVID-19,
countries are working to maintain the significant gains that have been made during the past 4 years.
De-Escalation of COVID-19 Operations within Canada
Following the Omicron-driven maximum peak in January 2022, COVID-19 activity declined and the
previous pattern of distinct waves of infection began to subside. All provinces and territories
shifted public health priorities to focus on a more sustainable response for the long-term
management of COVID-19 in Canada that includes integrating COVID-19 activities into the overall
management of respiratory viral infections and continued efforts to build pandemic preparedness
capacity and resilience for any future emergencies.
Provinces and territories have de-escalated many public health measures recommendations and
requirements and reduced surveillance and laboratory testing capacities specific to COVID-19. At
the same time, all provinces and territories are ensuring the availability of preventative measures
such as COVID-19 vaccines, and continue to monitor changes to COVID-19's epidemiology.
Canada continues to comprehensively monitor COVID-19 activity while continuing to integrate the
surveillance approach across respiratory viruses.
Access to COVID19 vaccine supply has been assured for 2024-25 through our existing Advance
Purchase Agreements (APA), with regulatory approved updated vaccines formulated to circulating
strains anticipated to be a threat this coming fall, providing continued protection for at-risk
populations.
Activity on PMB C-293: An Act Respecting Pandemic Prevention and Preparedness
Bill C-293 was studied by HESA in October 2023, and reported back to the House of Commons on
October 27 without substantive discussion having taken place. The House of Commons is expected
to have an opportunity to examine the Bill and will potentially consider amendments, in advance of
third reading.
HEALTH DATA AND DIGITAL TOOLS
ISSUE
Persistent and important gaps in data collection, sharing, and use negatively impact personal,
health professional, and system-wide health decision making in Canada.
These gaps impair public health responses, reduce health outcomes for Canadians, and contribute
to health inequities.
Canadians should be able to securely access their own health information and benefit from it being
shared between health workers and across health settings – allowing for better care while
respecting their privacy.
KEY FACTS
We know that Canadians want digital access to their entire health record and want their primary
care provider to have this complete access as well.
A recent report from 2023 shows that less than 40% of Canadians have accessed their health
information online.
Less than 2 out of 5 Canadian doctors reported sending patient information electronically to other
doctors involved in their patients’ care.
A modernized health system with standardized health data and digital tools is a shared health
priority identified in the Government’s plan for Working Together to Improve Health Care for
Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
Canadians should be able to securely access their health information and benefit from it being
shared between health workers and across health settings.
We also need insights from health data to inform key decisions about our health system or public
health events.
The Government’s Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians plan provides close to
$200 billion over 10 years for health care, including $25 billion over ten years to support provinces
and territories through bilateral agreements.
Modernizing the health system with standardized health data and digital tools is at the core of this
plan.
IF PRESSED ON DATA PRIVACY AND SECURITY
Robust federal, provincial and territorial privacy laws govern how personal health information is
collected, used, stored and shared. Only authorized users can have access to patient records.
Health information custodians and health IT vendors are responsible for safeguarding Canadians’
personal health information and must adhere to privacy laws to ensure proper handling, storage,
and access to information.
Just as banks protect financial information, it is essential to ensure that health data is kept private
and secure.
IF PRESSED ON HOW HEALTH DATA WILL HELP THE CURRENT HEALTH CARE SYSTEM CRISIS
One of the most impactful tools at our disposal to ensure improvements to the health system is
data—to provide stronger evidence, inform better decisions and ultimately see concrete outcomes
for Canadians.
When data flows through digitally connected health systems, health providers can work better as a
team to deliver higher quality and more efficient care.
Likewise, when data flows back through the system to support research and decision-making, it
can drive improvements in health care services and inform public health responses.
IF PRESSED ON THE PAN-CANADIAN INTEROPERABILITY ROADMAP
In March 2023, a Pan-Canadian Interoperability Roadmap was endorsed by FPT governments
(except Quebec).
The Roadmap provides guidance to provinces, territories, health system managers and industry on
common standards to support the secure transfer of health information from different systems and
to patients themselves.
Led by Canada Health Infoway, FPT governments are collaborating on common standards needed
to improve patient access to their electronic health information and remove barriers to data sharing
among health care professionals through a secure, digitally-connected system.
Federally, we are exploring possible legislative and regulatory mechanisms to support our national
interoperability strategy.
IF PRESSED ON PAN-CANADIAN HEALTH DATA CHARTER
In October 2023, the Pan-Canadian Health Data Charter was endorsed by FPT Health Ministers and
made public. It reaffirms a common set of principles intended to guide collective action towards a
shared vision for health data in Canada.
The Charter highlights principles related to person-centric health information, equity, public
engagement and trust. It also highlights Canada’s commitment to respecting Indigenous data
sovereignty and Indigenous-led health data governance.
As work continues to advance the Working Together plan, the Government is committed to
upholding the Pan-Canadian Health Data Charter to guide collective action.
IF PRESSED ON THE NUMBER OF CANADIANS WHO HAVE ACCESSED THEIR HEALTH
INFORMATION ELECTRONICALLY
In Canada, the percentage of Canadians who access their health information electronically varies
between studies. For instance, a 2023 Statistics Canada survey states that 51% of Canadians
accessed their personal health information electronically (vs. 37% reported in CIHI’s Snapshot
report).
This can likely be attributed to broader wording of Statistics Canada’s question where use of digital
tools and services is bundled with ‘access to data’, including prescription renewals and online
appointments. In comparison, the source data used by CIHI reports on these separately.
BACKGROUND
Digital Health and Health Data
Digital health systems across the country are highly fragmented leading to poor ability to collect,
share and use health data, negatively impacting personal, health professional, and system-wide
health decision making. These gaps impair public health responses, reduce health outcomes for
Canadians, and contribute to health inequities.
Since the COVID-19 pandemic, federal, provincial and territorial governments have been
collaborating closely to advance a shared goal of developing a world-class health data system
which will help:
Canadians better manage their own health by improving access to their own electronic health
information;
Health care providers make more informed decisions and work better together through improved
flow of health data across care settings;
Researchers and innovators access the data they need to develop new therapies and treatments;
and
System administrators and decision makers use comprehensive and comparable health data to
guide improvements Canada’s health care system, transparently measure results, and better
prepare and manage for public health events.
Federal Commitments and Investments
The 2021 Speech from the Throne and the Minister of Health’s Mandate Letter commit to continued
collaboration with provinces and territories to accelerate work towards a world-class health data
system that is timely, usable, open-by-default, connected and comprehensive.
Extensive federal, provincial and territorial collaboration has occurred since the COVID-19
pandemic to make progress on this commitment, including through the advancement of a Digital
Health Action Plan to improve access to virtual care and digital tools. Based on the advice of an
Expert Advisory Group on health data, governments worked together to develop the components
necessary for a pan-Canadian health data strategy that included focus on improved health data
governance, common standards for data sharing, modernized and aligned health data policies that
meet the digital age, and enhanced public engagement to build better trust and literacy of health
data.
Building on these efforts, Budget 2023 outlined the federal government’s plan to provide close to
$200 billion over ten years in health transfers to provinces and territories, including $46.2 billion in
new funding through new Canada Health Transfer measures, tailored bilateral agreements to meet
the needs of each province and territory, funding for personal support workers, and an increase to
the Territorial Health Investment Fund. In addition, Budget 2023 announced $2 billion over 10 years
to address Indigenous health priorities and $505 million over five years, starting in 2023-24, to the
Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), Canada Health Infoway, and other federal data
partners.
Canada Health Transfer Five Percent Guarantee: The federal government will provide top-up
payments to achieve Canada Health Transfer increases of at least five percent per year for the next
five years. The last top-up payment will be rolled into the Canada Health Transfer base at the end of
the five-year period, resulting in a permanent funding increase. This represents an estimated $17.1
billion over ten years in additional funding through the Canada Health Transfer.
Tailored Bilateral Agreements: The federal government is providing $25 billion over ten years
through a new set of bilateral agreements to address individual provincial and territorial health
system needs, such as expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and
reducing backlogs, increasing mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health
systems through standardized health data and digital tools.
Bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible, and provinces and territories have options to tailor
their respective Action Plans in response to the unique needs of their populations and geography.
To access their share of the federal funding, provincial and territorial governments have committed
to improving how health data is collected, shared, used and reported to Canadians to promote
greater transparency on results, to help manage public health emergencies, and to improve access
to Canadians’ own health information.
Recent FPT Collaboration on Digital Health and Health Data
Building off lessons learned from the pandemic and recognizing the critical importance of timely
access to health data, FPT governments are collaborating to modernize how health data is
managed in Canada.
Federal, provincial and territorial governments have been collaborating on health care priorities and
achieved key results, including the development of a Shared Pan-Canadian Interoperability
Roadmap. The Roadmap, published by Canada Health Infoway and endorsed in March 2023 by FPT
Health Ministers (except Quebec), outlines the path forward for safe and secure access to health
information that can flow easily between different parts of the health care system, allowing patients
and providers to work together more effectively.
In October 2023, Health Ministers approved a Joint FPT Action Plan and a Pan-Canadian Health
Data Charter to drive progress on the health data commitments of the Working Together plan. The
five key priorities in the Action Plan include:
Collecting and sharing high-quality and comparable depersonalized information needed to improve
health care for Canadians
Implementing aligned provincial and territorial health data policies and legislative frameworks to
support the public good
Advancing principles outlined in the Health Data Charter for the management of health data
Collecting and sharing public health data to support Canada’s preparedness and response to
public health events.
Adopting common interoperability standards guided by the Pan-Canadian Interoperability
Roadmap to better connect Canada’s healthcare system
In driving progress towards implementing the standards from the Roadmap and realizing a vision of
a modernized, connected health system, the federal government is also exploring the best
mechanisms to drive the adoption of common standards, such as possible legislative and
regulatory frameworks.
The Working Together plan also includes an agreement to develop and use comparable indicators,
working with CIHI and its data partners. In addition to the eight common headline indicators, for
which data has already been made public in August 2023 through a snapshot report published by
CIHI, a broader suite of indicators for the shared health priorities, as well as for Aging with Dignity
and Indigenous Health, are being developed in collaboration with provinces and territories, experts,
CIHI and Indigenous Peoples.
HEALTH RESEARCH
ISSUE
Budget 2024 proposed a suite of measures to modernize the federal research support system,
including investments in core research, scholarships and fellowships.
KEY FACTS
The Government of Canada is making progress on the commitment to develop a plan to modernize
the federal research funding ecosystem.
In October 2022, the Government launched the Advisory Panel on the Federal Research Support
System (the Advisory Panel) to provide independent, expert policy advice on the structure and
governance of the federal system supporting research and talent.
Budget 2024 provides $825 million to increase the value and number of research scholarships and
fellowships, and $1.8 billion to the federal granting councils to increase core research grant
funding.
KEY MESSAGES
Our government continues to invest in health research with potential to solve health challenges
facing Canadians.
We also recognize that student and postgraduate researchers are tackling the world’s biggest
challenges. Their solutions have potential to make the world a better place and drive Canadian
prosperity and health.
Government support for master’s, doctoral and post-doctoral students creates new research
opportunities for the next generation and helps keep Canada’s top research talent at home.
That is why Budget 2024 provides $825 million to increase the value and number of research
scholarships and fellowships.
Budget 2024 also provides $1.8 billion to the federal granting councils to increase core research
grant funding and support our vibrant health research community.
These are just a few examples that demonstrate our commitment to supporting a vibrant health
research community to improve the health outcomes of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE DETAILS OF THE CAPSTONE FUNDING ORGANIZATION
Canada’s world-class researchers are solving the most pressing challenges of today, and making
groundbreaking discoveries in areas such as climate change and health.
To provide better coordination across the federally funded research ecosystem and maximize the
impact of government support, Budget 2024 announced the creation of a new research funding
organization.
The new organization and structure will strengthen and modernize Canada’s federal support for
research.
It will help to advance internationally collaborative, multi-disciplinary and mission-driven research.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2021 committed funding to grow Canada’s bio-manufacturing sector, including $250 million
to create a new Clinical Trials Fund through CIHR, and $250 million through granting agencies to
create a research fund to support bio-innovation-related research. It also committed $30 million
over two years for paediatric cancer research and $20 million over 5 years to support the National
Institute for Women’s Health Research, as well as $25 million over five years for diabetes initiatives,
including research. Budget 2022 committed $20 million over five years to ramp up efforts to learn
more about dementia and brain health and 20 million over five years for research on post-COVID
condition. Other commitments included $40.9 million over five years, and $9.7 million ongoing to
the federal granting agencies for scholarships and fellowships for promising Black student
researchers.
Budget 2024 proposed significant investments in research, including $825 million to increase the
value and number of research scholarships and fellowships, $30 million to support Indigenous
researchers and their communities, and $1.8 billion to the federal granting councils to increase
core research grant funding.
Specifically, Budget 2024’s investment will increase the annual value of master’s and doctoral
student scholarships to $27,000 and $40,000, respectively, and post-doctoral fellowships to
$70,000. It will also increase the number of research scholarships and fellowships provided,
building to approximately 1,720 more graduate students or postdoctoral researchers benefiting
each year. In addition to increasing the number and value of graduate scholarships and fellowships,
Budget 2024 also commits to making it easier for students and fellows to access support by
streamlining the programs into one talent program.
Finally, to provide better coordination across the federally funded research ecosystem and
maximize the impact of government support, Budget 2024 announced the creation of a new
research funding organization.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)
ISSUE
The Federal Government’s position on amending the Criminal Code to permit advance requests for
MAID.
The temporary exclusion of MAID eligibility for persons whose sole underlying medical condition is
a mental illness has been extended by three years, to March 17, 2027.
KEY FACTS
Advance Requests
An advance request refers to situations where a person requests MAID before they are eligible (and
before they want) to receive it. A person outlines the circumstances under which they would want
to receive MAID, in the future, if such circumstances arise after they lose decision making capacity
The provision of MAID based on an advance request is not permitted under the Criminal Code
because the provisions require that a person must be experiencing enduring and intolerable
suffering and be able to provide consent immediately before MAID is provided, with limited
exception. With an advance request, a person would make a request for MAID before they are
experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering, and receive MAID after they have lost capacity to
consent.
The Criminal Code does allow for a waiver of final consent in specific situations in which people
have already been assessed as eligible for MAID under Track 1 (natural death reasonably
foreseeable).
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) reviewed advance requests as one of several topics
addressed in its report tabled in February 2023. AMAD recommended that the Government of
Canada amend the Criminal Code to allow for advance requests following a diagnosis of a serious
and incurable medical condition disease, or disorder leading to incapacity. The federal
government’s response to the report does not make commitments to expanding federal legislation,
noting that further consultation and study is required.
In June 2023, the National Assembly of Québec passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting
end-of-life care and other legislative provisions. This legislation created a provincial regime to
permit advance requests for MAID (to come into force on a date set by the government that can be
no later than June 7, 2025).
During the recent parliamentary debate on Bill C-62, which extended the temporary exclusion of
MAID eligibility where mental illness is the sole underlying condition, the question of allowing
advance requests for MAID was frequently raised, even though it was not connected to the content
of the Bill.
Mental Illness
Former Bill C-7, which received Royal Assent on March 17, 2021, included a sunset clause
excluding persons with a mental illness as a sole underlying medical condition from seeking MAID
until March 17, 2023. The date was deferred by one year to March 17, 2024 with the passage of
former Bill C-39.
On January 29, 2024, the Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) tabled its report examining the
degree of preparedness to safely assess MAID eligibility for persons whose sole underlying
condition is a mental illness. The Committee concluded that health care systems are not ready and
that further time is needed.
On February 29, 2024, Bill C-62 received Royal Assent, thereby extending the exclusion for MAID
eligibility solely on the basis of a mental illness to March 17, 2027. The new law requires that a joint
Parliamentary committee undertake a comprehensive review relating to the eligibility for MAID of
persons suffering solely from a mental illness within two years of the Bill receiving royal assent, that
is by March 1, 2026.
Over the next three years, the federal government will continue to work with the provinces and
territories and other stakeholders to enhance system preparedness such as supporting ongoing
uptake of practitioner training and other key resources, the development of necessary coordination
services, exploring models of case review and enhancing engagement with Indigenous Peoples and
other key populations.
KEY MESSAGES
Advance Requests
We are aware that there is strong support among the public for advance requests, in particular for
persons who have been diagnosed with a capacity-limiting disease such as Alzheimer’s.
We have also heard that practitioners place a great deal of value on obtaining a “final consent” as a
confirmation of a person’s wishes.
Criminal Code amendments to permit advance requests would be very complex and first require a
great deal of consultation and study with provinces/territories, experts and health care
stakeholders.
Mental Illness
The Government recognizes that MAID is a deeply personal choice and remains committed to
supporting eligible individuals in having their MAID request considered in a fair, safe and consistent
manner, while supporting efforts to protect those who may be vulnerable.
A great deal of progress has been made to prepare for MAID eligibility for persons with a mental
illness, however the provinces and territories and other key stakeholders are at various levels of
readiness and have requested more time.
In addition, the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying has concluded that more
time is needed as the health care system is not yet prepared to safely assess MAID eligibility for
requests based on mental illness as the sole underlying condition.
The three-year extension provided through the passing of former Bill C-62 will allow the necessary
preparations within our health care systems, including training more clinicians.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF A QUEBEC PHYSICIAN WOULD PROVIDE MAID IN
ACCORDANCE WITH PROVINCIAL LAW, BUT WITHOUT CHANGES TO THE CRIMINAL CODE
A practitioner who provided MAID in compliance with Québec’s advance request scheme, even
once it is in force, would commit a criminal offence. This is because they would not satisfy all of the
Criminal Code requirements and therefore could not avail themselves of the exemptions in the
Code.
IF PRESSED ON WHY A THREE-YEAR DELAY AND NOT AN INDEFINITE PAUSE
The Government of Canada recognizes that mental illness can cause suffering on par with that of
physical illnesses.
The question is about “when” and not “if”. It was important to establish a firm timeline, otherwise
we risked losing momentum based on the excellent progress and study completed to date.
A three-year extension will provide provinces and territories and partners sufficient time to have
structures and mechanisms in place to safely assess MAID requests where mental illness is the
sole underlying condition.
The extension also provides practitioners with time to become trained and gain confidence in
applying the guidelines and safeguards.
IF PRESSED ON THE WORK UNDERTAKEN TO SUPPORT PREPAREDNESS
Our Government has been collaborating with provinces and territories, medical and mental health
communities to support system preparedness for MAID eligibility on the basis of a mental illness
alone.
We have supported important initiatives including development of a model Practice Standard and
Advice to the Profession, the launch of an accredited bilingual curriculum for MAID clinicians, two
Knowledge Exchange Workshops for MAID assessors and providers, and launched ongoing
engagement with Indigenous Peoples to understand their diverse perspectives on MAID.
We are committed to continuing to work with provinces and territories to advance health system
preparedness in the coming years.
IF PRESSED ON THE QUESTION OF MAID FOR PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS AS THE SOLE
UNDERLYING CONDITION
The Government recognizes that mental disorders can cause suffering on par with that of physical
illnesses.
Resources such as the Model MAID Practice Standard, Advice to the Profession, and the MAID
training curriculum, and additional resources developed by provinces and territories will support
the medical and psychiatric communities in being prepared for changes to the law.
The Government is committed to furthering our engagement with persons with lived experience,
including experts in the mental health community, to help inform next steps and to prepare for
March 2027.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S REACTION TO MEDIA STORIES ALLEGING THAT PEOPLE ARE
SEEKING MAID DUE TO LACK OF NEEDED SERVICES
The legislation sets a high bar with stringent eligibility criteria including having a grievous and
irremediable medical condition. No one can receive MAID solely on the basis of a lack of social
support, such as housing and mental health services.
Improving access to social and health services remains a priority and governments are working to
address disparities.
On June 22, 2023, the Government passed the Canada Disability Benefit Act to reduce poverty and
support financial security of persons with disabilities.
BACKGROUND
ADVANCE REQUESTS
Studies on Advance Requests
When former Bill C-14 passed in June 2016 permitting MAID in Canada, it required the Ministers of
Health and Justice to undertake reviews on issues relating to complex types of MAID requests that
were not included in the Bill. These included advance requests; requests by mature minors, and
requests where mental illness is the sole underlying medical condition.
The Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) was selected to undertake the reviews, for which the
objective was to gather and analyze relevant information and evidence to support further
discussion on the implications of extending or not extending eligibility in the three circumstances. A
report on each topic was tabled in Parliament in December 2018.
The CCA reports did not include recommendations, but summarized the findings and available
evidence. The report on advance requests identified many ethical, legal and process challenges
associated with implementing advance requests.
International Experience
International experiences with advance requests is limited. Although permitted in the Netherlands
and Belgium, advance requests represented just 1 - 4% of all assisted deaths over a 15-year period
in the Netherlands, and only 1% of Belgium’s euthanasia cases since 2018-2019. In many other
jurisdictions where MAID is permitted (e.g., several US states), a person must self-administer the
lethal medication, so advance requests would, by definition, not be feasible.
Varied levels of support
There is public support for advance requests. According to a Leger poll in February 2024, two-thirds
of Canadians (65%) believe that people suffering from an illness that can affect their cognitive
ability should be able to make a request in advance for MAID. This proportion is higher among
Quebecers (77%) and people aged 55 and over (69%). However, there are some communities who
do not support advance requests, such as organizations representing persons with disabilities.
Some practitioners and experts have raised significant concerns about advance requests for MAID.
For example, there may be difficulties interpreting the document setting out the advance request,
apparent resistance by the person at the time MAID is to be administered, or hesitation among
MAID providers to act on an advance request should they be permitted by law.
Current legislation
Advance requests for MAID are not permitted in Canada under the Criminal Code because the
provisions require that a person must be experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering and be
able to provide consent immediately before MAID is provided. With an advance request, a person
would make a request for MAID before they are experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering, and
receive MAID after they have lost capacity to consent.
The Criminal Code does allow for a waiver of final consent in specific situations in which people
have already been assessed as eligible for MAID under Track 1 (natural death reasonably
foreseeable). In this situation, they have specified a date for receiving MAID and they are concerned
about losing capacity before the provision of MAID and not being able to provide final consent. An
advance request, in contrast, involves a person making a request for MAID before they wish to have
it, and before they are eligible, to receive it.
A person with dementia may be eligible to receive MAID if the person meets all the eligibility criteria
and the MAID provider can ensure the safeguards are met. This means that the person must be in
an advanced state of decline in capability, but still has the capacity to make health care decisions.
It can present a challenge for the MAID assessor/provider to find the right time when both these
criteria can be met.
Bill proposing expansion
On June 2, 2022, Bill S-248, An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying), was
introduced in the Senate by Senator Pamela Wallin. The aim of the Bill is to create a federal advance
request regime for MAID in the Criminal Code for persons who have received a diagnosis that will
lead to incapacity. On June 8, 2023, the Bill passed second reading and was referred to the Standing
Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs (LCJC) for review just prior to summer
adjournment. This review has not yet started. The Government has not yet indicated its position on
this Bill.
Quebec
In June 2023, the National Assembly of Québec passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting
end-of-life care and other legislative provisions, which created a provincial regime to permit
advance requests for MAID (to come into force on a date set by the government that can be no later
than June 7, 2025).
Quebec’s legislative amendments on advance requests are based on several Quebec reports
produced over the past few years exploring MAID-related issues. At least three reports have made
recommendations to permit advance requests [Expert Group on the Issue of Incapacity and
Medical Aid in Dying (2019); 2020-21 Annual Report of the Quebec Commission on End-of-Life
Care; Select Committee on the Evolution of the Act respecting end-of-life care (December 2021)].
Given the Criminal Code does not permit the provision of MAID based on an advance request, a
practitioner who provides MAID in compliance with Québec’s advance request scheme would
commit a criminal offence. In recent months, Quebec has been asking the Federal Government to
explore options that would remove legal barriers and permit Quebec to implement an advance
request regime. Most recently in February 2024, the Québec National Assembly passed a motion
requesting the federal Parliament to amend the Criminal Code so that Québec can legally allow
advance requests for medical aid in dying according to its provincial legislation.
MENTAL ILLNESS
MAID LEGISLATION AND MENTAL ILLNESS
In the original 2016 legislation (former Bill C-14), which legalized MAID for persons whose natural
death was reasonably foreseeable, the Act required the Ministers of Health and Justice to initiate
independent reviews on three particularly complex issues, including requests where the sole
underlying medical condition was mental illness.
In 2016, the Government asked the Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) to conduct these
independent studies. Following a comprehensive study of this matter, experts in this field could not
come to a consensus on this very complicated issue.
Four years later, the Government introduced former Bill C-7, which proposed to expand MAID
eligibility to persons whose death was not reasonably foreseeable. As introduced, former Bill C-7
contained a provision stating that mental illness was not considered to be a disease, illness or
disability. In other words, requests for MAID based solely on mental illness would not be permitted.
As such, no provision for a temporary exclusion was included in the former Bill.
During its study of former Bill C-7, the Senate concluded that MAID requests based solely on
mental illness should be permitted, and amended the former Bill to include a temporary, 18 month
exclusion of eligibility. The Government responded by tabling a motion in the House extending the
temporary exclusion to two years and adding the requirement for an expert independent review.
These amendments were passed in the final Bill.
In March 2023, former Bill C-39 extended for one year the temporary exclusion of MAID eligibility for
persons suffering solely from a mental illness.
On February 29, 2024, Bill C-62 received Royal Assent, thereby extending the exclusion for MAID
eligibility solely on the basis of a mental illness to March 17, 2027.The new law requires that a joint
parliamentary committee undertake a comprehensive review relating to the eligibility for MAID of
persons suffering solely from a mental illness within two years of the Bill receiving royal assent, that
is by March 1, 2026.
MAID AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER
To be eligible for MAID, a person must: have a serious and incurable illness, disease, or disability;
be in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability; and, experience enduring and
intolerable suffering. All three of these criteria must be met for a person to be deemed eligible.
Furthermore, the legislation includes enhanced safeguards, which make it a responsibility of the
medical practitioner to ensure that an individual seeking MAID is made aware of the supports
available to them. The person seeking MAID and the practitioners must have discussed reasonable
and available means to relieve the person’s suffering, and agree that the person has seriously
considered those means. These safeguards for persons not nearing a natural death aim to help
practitioners identify and potentially address the sources of suffering and vulnerability that could
lead the person to ask for MAID.
Clinician resources, such as a MAID practice standard and a training curriculum, have been
developed to assist clinicians in their assessments of complex MAID requests, such as those that
involve a mental disorder. These resources point to the need to assess the person over a period of
time and not during a time of crisis to ascertain the durability of the condition and proper capacity
to consent. The MAID curriculum includes a module on MAID and mental illness which includes
information on substance use disorder.
No one can receive MAID solely on the basis of lack of social supports such as housing and mental
health services. All jurisdictions in Canada have a broad range of policies, programs and initiatives
aimed at providing health and social service supports to individuals.
Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing $45 million to develop national standards for
mental health and substance use services, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health
organizations, and key stakeholders. National standards will help to ensure that Canadians receive
high quality, (e.g., safe, effective, patient-centred, equitable, and culturally sensitive) evidence-
based mental health and substance use services. The Government of Canada is also currently
investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental health and substance
use services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and
addiction services.
THE EXPERT PANEL ON MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
As a requirement of former Bill C-7, an Expert Panel was appointed by Ministers of Justice and
Health to conduct an independent review to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply
to MAID requests by persons who have a mental illness. The final report of the Expert Panel on MAID
and Mental Illness was tabled in Parliament on May 13, 2022. It included 19 recommendations that
provide guidance on the interpretation of the MAID eligibility criteria, application of the legislated
safeguards, and the assessment process, as well as advice on measures to improve the functioning
of Canada’s MAID regime more broadly.
The Expert Panel found that the challenges people tend to associate with MAID eligibility for
persons with mental disorder (e.g., irremediability, decision-making capacity, suicidality and
structural vulnerability) are neither unique to requests for MAID from persons with a mental
disorder, nor applicable to every requester who has a mental disorder.
A key conclusion of the Panel was that new legal safeguards are not required to ensure that
requests for MAID from individuals with a mental disorder are handled safely and appropriately.
They noted that the legal framework for MAID already sets a very high bar for eligibility – that existing
MAID eligibility criteria and safeguards, when interpreted appropriately and buttressed by existing
laws, standards, and practices in related areas of healthcare, can provide an adequate structure for
assessing those more complex (track two) MAID requests, including where a mental disorder is the
sole underlying medical condition. The key consideration for the Panel was ensuring that
practitioners have additional guidance on how to operationalize the existing eligibility criteria and
safeguards in the context of mental disorder and other complex MAID requests.
The central recommendation of the Panel was for federal, provincial and territorial governments to
facilitate collaboration among regulatory bodies on the development of MAID practice standards.
This process was completed in March 2023.
In addition to the collaborative work towards the development of MAID practice standards,
provinces and territories, in collaboration with healthcare regulators and MAID communities, have
also been working towards preparedness – some creating specific teams, adding resources,
updating their practice standards and encouraging training to help clinicians in addressing requests
for those more complex MAID cases, and where mental illness is a sole underlying medical
condition.
On July 26, 2022, the Ministers of Health, Justice and Disability Inclusion issued a news release on
the Government’s progress in implementing several of the Panel’s key recommendations to help
prepare the MAID practice community in assessing these complex MAID requests. This progress
included: developing a practice standard for MAID; developing a nationally fully accredited MAID
curriculum; enhancements to the data collection system under the Regulations for the Monitoring
of MAID; plans for Indigenous engagement; and, federally-funded qualitative research on MAID.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The 2021 legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following
its Royal Assent. It stipulated that the Parliamentary Review must address (but not necessarily be
limited to) the topics of mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care
in Canada, and the protection of Canadians with disabilities.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) held three meetings before dissolution. The
committee reconvened in April 2022 and, on June 23, 2022, submitted an interim report,
specifically focused on MAID where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition. The
interim report made no formal recommendations but urged the federal government to support the
timely implementation of the recommendations of the Expert Panel.
AMAD’s second report, containing 23 recommendations on all topics under its remit, was tabled on
February 15, 2023. On June 15, 2023, the Government tabled its Response to AMAD’s report and
recommendations in the House of Commons.
AMAD reconvened in October 2023 to follow up on Recommendation 13 of its second report which
was to examine the degree of preparedness attained for the safe application of MAID for persons
whose sole underlying condition is a mental illness. AMAD tabled its recommendation to
Parliament on January 29, 2024. It concluded that health care systems are not ready and that
further time is needed, and recommended an additional delay until the Minister of Health and the
Minister of Justice are satisfied, in consultation with provincial and territorial counterparts and
Indigenous Peoples, that it can be safely and adequately provided. It also recommended that a joint
parliamentary committee be re-established to assess preparedness one year prior to expanding
MAID eligibility for mental illness as the sole condition. The report included two dissenting opinions
(by Committee Senators) and two supplementary opinions (Conservative Party and the Bloc
Québecois).
The new law, which delays expansion of the current MAID regime to March 2027, requires that a
joint Parliamentary committee undertake a comprehensive review relating to the eligibility for MAID
of persons suffering solely from a mental illness within two years of the Bill receiving royal assent,
that is by March 1, 2026.
RESTRICTIONS ON FOOD ADVERTISING TO CHILDREN
ISSUE
Between April and June 2023, Health Canada consulted Canadians on a policy update regarding its
proposed approach to restricting the advertising of foods to children (known as M2K). The policy
will form the basis of draft regulations expected to be published in Spring 2024 for public
consultation (CGI). The proposed restrictions are more targeted than what was proposed in 2018
and will apply to TV and online media only. Health stakeholders are supportive of federal action and
the targeted restrictions given the proposed policy’s strong nutrient criteria, its application in areas
of high exposure and the commitment to continued monitoring to inform potential future actions,
however, will continue to advocate for broader restrictions. Industry is critical of the government
advancing regulations as they recently introduced their new self-regulatory advertising Code, which
was implemented on June 28, 2023.
KEY FACTS
Diet-related chronic disease is a critical issue for Canadians and the entire Canadian health care
system.
There is a strong body of evidence showing that healthy eating patterns can reduce the risk of
chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, certain cancers, type 2 diabetes, and associated
conditions such as obesity and high blood pressure.
Almost one in three children in Canada (two in three Indigenous children) lives with overweight or
obesity. These children are at a higher risk of developing health problems and chronic diseases
now, and later in life.
Evidence shows that food advertising influences children’s food attitudes, preferences, purchase
requests, consumption patterns, and ultimately, overall health. The more children are exposed to
food advertising, the more likely they are to request or consume advertised foods.
In Canada, children are exposed to food advertising throughout their day in a variety of settings,
including in their homes (e.g., while watching TV or browsing the internet), recreation centers,
outdoors, in restaurants, and in grocery stores.
The evolution of online media and the popularity of smart phones, tablets, computers, and other
devices have made it easier for advertisers to reach children, subjecting them to further advertising
of foods that contribute to excessive intakes of sugars, sodium and saturated fat.
Health Canada continues to advance work on restricting food advertising to children and consulted
on a policy update regarding its proposed approach to restricting the advertising of food to children.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government supports restrictions on food advertising to children, to protect them from the
risks of chronic diseases caused by an unhealthy diet.
Health Canada recently consulted on an approach, focussing restrictions on television and online
media, areas where children are highly exposed to food advertising.
The Department has reviewed the feedback, which will help inform draft regulations for public
consultation in spring 2024.
Health Canada will continue to monitor food advertising to children in Canada to ensure it has the
best available evidence.
IF PRESSED ON BILL C-252 AND REGULATORY ALIGNMENT
We continue to support MP Lattanzio’s Private Member’s Bill (C-252 – Child Health Protection Act)
to help protect children from the influence of advertising of certain foods, which is continuing
through the legislative process.
In spring 2023, in parallel to consideration of Bill C-252, Health Canada also consulted on an
updated policy approach to restrict food advertising to children, which could be implemented
under existing authorities.
Bill C-252 seeks to introduce an advertising prohibition at the level of the Food and Drugs Act and is
complementary to Health Canada’s regulatory work.
IF PRESSED ON EXISTING LAWS IN QUEBEC AND INTERPLAY WITH POTENTIAL FEDERAL
RESTRICTIONS
I would like to commend Quebec’s decades of leadership in protecting those most vulnerable from
the impacts of advertising through the Consumer Protection Act.
Implementing federal regulations would provide nation-wide protections against food advertising
primarily directed at children, which I believe will complement Quebec’s efforts.
Health Canada’s food advertising prohibition is not intended to interfere or conflict with existing
restrictions on advertising to children in Quebec. They would therefore continue to apply and would
operate in parallel with federal restrictions.
We remain committed to engaging all interested partners and stakeholders on our approach.
IF PRESSED ON INDUSTRY’S SELF-REGULATORY ADVERTISING CODE
We appreciate industry’s efforts in implementing their new Code for the Responsible Advertising of
Food and Beverage Products to Children in 2023.
Our proposal reinforces restrictions where children are highly exposed, on TV and online, offering
enhanced protections for children from the impacts of food advertising.
We acknowledge the Code will provide protections in media and settings beyond our proposal,
such as in schools, radio and print. We will continue monitoring food advertising to children and
teens across multiple areas to inform future actions.
BACKGROUND
Almost one in three children in Canada (two in three Indigenous children) lives with overweight or
obesity. There is an increasingly urgent public health concern associated with excess weight
because children who are overweight or obese are at an increased risk of developing chronic
conditions and illnesses such as high cholesterol, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, heart
disease, and stroke – conditions that were once almost exclusively seen in adults.
Research shows that unhealthy diets with excess intakes of sodium, sugars and/or saturated fat are
a key modifiable risk factor linked to obesity, high blood pressure, and diabetes, among other
chronic diseases. People with diet-related conditions and chronic diseases are also much more
vulnerable to severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Many children in Canada are consuming excess amounts of these nutrients of public health
concern. For example, 81% of children between the ages of 1 and 3 and 99% of children between
the ages of 4 and 13 years exceed recommended limits of sodium intake. As for sugars, 78% of
children aged 1-8 years and 86% of children aged 9-13 years exceed the WHO recommendation.
Key Evidence
Children are particularly vulnerable to advertising. Research in this area suggest that children under
8 years of age do not possess the cognitive abilities to understand the purpose of advertising. Only
from the age of 10 or 11 is a child’s level of advertising recognition comparable to an adult’s. By the
age of twelve, most children have an understanding of the selling and persuasive intent of
advertising but have still not acquired an adult-like understanding.
Evidence shows that food advertising influences children’s food attitudes, preferences, purchase
requests, consumption patterns, and ultimately, overall health.
In 2019, children aged 2 to 11 were exposed to an average of 1,733 food advertisements on
television, which translates to 33 food ads/week and close to 5 foods ads per day for the average
child. The majority of these ads were for foods that contribute to excess intakes of sodium, sugars
and/or saturated fat.
A Canadian study published in 2019 estimated that children aged 7-11 are exposed to
approximately 30 foods ads per week, and youth aged 13-16 an average of 189 ads per week, on
social media apps alone. More than 90% of ads were for foods that contribute to excess intakes of
sodium, sugars and/or saturated fat.
Studies have shown that advertisers typically employ strategies that strongly appeal to children. For
example, they feature striking graphics and visual design, including cartoons, use child humour and
fun themes, link the promotion of their products to incentives such as free toys and feature movie
and sports celebrities popular with children. In addition, behavioural tracking and targeted
advertising allows companies to reach children with more precision in digital media.
Health Canada’s Initiatives
Restricting the advertising of certain foods to children is a foundational initiative of Health Canada’s
Healthy Eating Strategy, which was launched in 2016, and has been a Minister of Health mandate
letter commitment since 2015.
Through the Healthy Eating Strategy, the Government has undertaken a robust set of initiatives to
improve the food environment in Canada and help Canadians make healthier food choices.
Significant progress has been made by improving nutrition labelling, eliminating industrial trans fats
in the food supply, releasing a new Canada’s food guide, publishing new sodium reduction targets
for processed foods, and publishing front-of-package nutrition labelling regulations. The
Government remains committed to implement mandatory restrictions on the advertising of certain
foods to children to protect this vulnerable population.
Parliamentary Initiatives Related to Food Advertising to Children
In February 2022, Ms. Patricia Lattanzio, M.P. (Liberal) introduced a Private Member’s Bill (Bill C-252
– Child Health Protection Act) to prohibit food and beverage marketing directed at children. On
September 28, 2022, it passed Second Reading and was referred to Committee (HESA) for further
review. The Bill was adopted by the Committee on April 18, 2023, passed by the House of
Commons, and began Second Reading in the Senate on November 30, 2023. The Bill has been
debated at Second Reading on four occasions since that time (it was last debated on April 16,
2024). It is unknown when Second Reading debate in the Senate will conclude.
Other legislative attempts have been made to restrict food advertising by Parliamentarians. For
example, Senate Public Bill S-228, The Child Health Protection Act, introduced by former
Conservative Senator Nancy Greene Raine in September 2016, aimed to reduce the influence of
food advertising on children. An amended version of the Bill received strong support from national
health groups, including Dietitians of Canada, Heart and Stroke Foundation, Coalition Poids,
Diabetes Canada, and the Childhood Obesity Foundation. The Bill was also strongly opposed and
heavily lobbied by major industry stakeholders. This included the Canadian Beverage Association,
Food, Health & Consumer Products of Canada, Restaurants Canada, the Retail Council of Canada
and the Association of Canadian Advertisers. Bill S-228 did not come to a final vote before the end
of the Parliamentary session in the fall of 2019.
Industry Code
Industry in Canada has self-regulated food advertising to children since 2007 through its Children’s
Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative (CAI). In summer 2021, four major industry associations
(Association of Canadian Advertisers, Restaurants Canada, Food, Health & Consumer Products of
Canada and Canadian Beverage Association) developed and introduced a new Code for the
Responsible Advertising of Food and Beverage Products to Children, which Ad Standards began
administering on June 28, 2023. While industry anticipates the new Code is expected to result in
some improvements compared with the CAI, such as applying to a broader range of food and
advertising companies and raising the age of children protected from under 12 to under 13,
significant gaps remain that will continue to leave children much exposed to food advertising.
These gaps are due to weaker nutrient and advertising criteria, exemptions, and limited
consequences for non-compliance given the voluntary nature of the code (i.e., not regulatory).
Quebec experience with restrictions on advertising
Québec’s 1980 Consumer Protection Act (QCPA) restricts the commercial advertising to children of
all goods and services. The restrictions apply to most forms of advertising and media, including
mascots and logos (i.e., brand advertising) and sponsorship. Subject to conditions, the QCPA
exempts advertising in children’s magazines, advertising for children’s entertainment events and
advertising via store windows, displays, containers, packaging and labels.
The scope and policy intent of Health Canada’s approach differs from that of Québec.
Health Canada’s proposal is aimed at protecting children’s health and so it focusses uniquely on
advertising to children of certain foods. The QCPA, on the other hand, has a broader consumer
protection objective and targets the advertising of all goods and services, including food, to
children.
Health Canada’s M2K proposal considered the QCPA, among other things, and aligns with it in a
few ways:
Under both frameworks, advertising restrictions apply to children under the age of 13.
Both Health Canada’s proposed policy and the QCPA take into consideration similar factors to
determine whether an ad is primarily directed at children (i.e., where the ad is communicated and
design/appeal of the ad).
However, the QCPA also considers the appeal of the good/service, which is not relevant for Health
Canada’s proposed policy given that Health Canada’s restrictions are concerned only with food
advertising.
Monitoring
As part of its comprehensive monitoring of the food advertising environment, Health Canada is
monitoring advertising of foods to children and teenagers.
Health Canada will continue to monitor and report publicly on food advertising to children and
teens, across a variety of settings, media and techniques, including in settings and media where
regulations would not apply, to help inform potential future regulatory changes.
MEASLES AND VACCINE HESITANCY
ISSUE
Beginning in late 2023 a large increase in measles has been observed worldwide, particularly in the
World Health Organization’s (WHO) European Region. The WHO reported that the number of cases
of measles worldwide increased by 18% and deaths increased by 43% globally in 2022 compared to
2021.
Currently, cases of measles have been reported in several provinces in Canada. As of May 22, 2024,
PHAC is aware of at least 77 measles cases in Canada. While some are associated with
international travel, most cases in 2024 in Canada were a result of a Canadian exposure. Many
cases are in unvaccinated individuals.
An unvaccinated child has died of measles. This is the first measles death reported to PHAC since
Canada achieved elimination status in 1998.
A number of factors including the global rise in mistrust in government and science is leading to
increasing rates of vaccine hesitancy thus creating declines in vaccine coverage. As a result, we
are seeing a re-emergence of certain vaccine preventable diseases (VPDs) in Canada and around
the world, such as measles.
KEY FACTS
Between 2017 and 2019, there was an increase in the number of confirmed measles cases
reported in Canada with between 29 to 113 cases reported each year. This coincided with a global
increase of the disease.
This declined sharply between 2020 and 2022, due to the implementation of COVID-19 border
measures and public health measures which led to a reduction in measles importations and
outbreaks.
Measles began to re-emerge in Canada in 2022, with 3 cases detected by the end of the year and 12
cases reported in 2023.
As of May 22, 2024, seventy-seven (77) measles cases and one death have been reported in
Canada already this calendar year.
In Canada, increases in measles cases are observed every 3-5 years due to outbreaks, with the
most recent outbreak year, prior to this year, being 2019.
Vaccine hesitancy is a contributing factor to these outbreaks.
The reasons for vaccine hesitancy are complex, and may include several intersecting factors, such
as concerns about vaccine safety, experiences of stigma and mistrust, belief in misinformation and
disinformation, and logistical, financial and other barriers to vaccination.
Canada’s 2021 Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey (cNICS) showed that over 97%
of parents of 2 year olds felt that vaccines were safe and effective, similar to pre-pandemic.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is aware of the recent reports of large increases in measles in Canada,
and tragically a death in an unvaccinated child.
Investigations are underway for cases that do not report international travel or a link to a known
case – sporadic cases are not unexpected, however.
Thanks to vaccination, measles is rare in Canada, but this is not the case in all countries.
Travelers should make sure they are fully protected from vaccine preventable diseases such as
measles before travelling outside of Canada.
Routine immunization programs remain one of the most effective measures to protect people in
Canada against vaccine-preventable diseases such as measles.
Ensuring people in Canada have reliable information on vaccination is an important part of
preventing and combating vaccine hesitancy.
Investments through the Immunization Partnership Fund are one way the Government is reaching
people in Canada, particularly among underserved communities and those with persisting gaps in
vaccine coverage.
We will continue to monitor the situation and provide people in Canada with reliable information to
protect them from serious illnesses.
IF PRESSED ON RECENT MEASLES DEATH
PHAC is aware that Public Health Ontario has reported a recent death due to measles in a child
under the age of five who was unvaccinated.
Although rare, measles can lead to severe complications, including deafness and brain injury
caused by inflammation of the brain, and even death. Measles and complications associated with a
measles infection can be prevented through vaccination.
Measles deaths are extremely rare in highly vaccinated populations.
No deaths from acute illness due to measles have been reported to PHAC since elimination of the
disease was achieved in Canada in 1998.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINATION
While vaccination is not mandatory in Canada, the Government of Canada is committed to
vaccination as a safe and effective measure that can help prevent disease and disability.
Provincial and territorial governments deliver vaccination programs and determine public health
requirements in their jurisdictions.
If you believe you or your family may have been exposed to measles and have not received two
doses of a measles-containing vaccine, or are immunocompromised, contact your healthcare
provider or local health department immediately for guidance.
IF PRESSED ON ROUTINE VACCINATION COVERAGE IN CANADA
The most recent national data available from the 2021 Childhood National Immunization Coverage
Survey (cNICS) show that between 2019 and 2021, national vaccine coverage has remained
generally stable.
The results also show that despite some parents and guardians encountering obstacles and delays
in receiving vaccinations, the majority (80%) of parents and guardians of all age groups reported
that there was no change in their decision to vaccinate their child due to the COVID-19 pandemic
and 18% were more inclined to vaccinate their child.
BACKGROUND
The measles virus spreads very easily, primarily through respiratory particles released when a
person who is infected breathes, talks, coughs or sneezes in a shared space with people who are
susceptible. It can also spread through direct contact with mucus from the nose or throat of
someone who is infected or contaminated surfaces or objects. The virus can live in the air or on
surfaces for up to 2 hours after a person who is infected has left the space.
It is a leading cause of death among young children globally. Measles has been eliminated in
Canada since 1998. In July 2023, the National Certification Committee re-verified Canada’s
elimination status for measles, rubella and Congenital Rubella Syndrome (CRS) for the 2021-2023
period. There was notable measles activity in the Region of the Americas in 2021, specifically in
Brazil where over 650 cases were reported. Measles is relatively rare in Canada due to effective
vaccination programs. However, it is important that people in Canada continue to be vaccinated
against measles given the travel-related risks of infection and spread to people who are
unvaccinated or not immune.
The rise of mistrust in government and science is increasing rates of vaccine hesitancy (which
refers to a reluctancy to receive recommend vaccines that may lead to a delay in or refusal of one,
some, or all vaccinations). Vaccine hesitancy is an ongoing threat to public health. In 2019 the
World Health Organization cited vaccine hesitancy as one of the top 10 risks to global health.
Addressing vaccine hesitancy requires a multipronged approach at all levels of government, at the
community level, and through engagement of healthcare providers as key trusted messengers of
vaccine information. While vaccine confidence in Canada is generally high, the continued support
for vaccination cannot be taken for granted and sustained efforts are needed to improve vaccine
literacy, build resilience to mis and disinformation and to support the social norm of vaccination.
PHAC acts as the focal point for vaccine confidence policy, research and behavioral analysis to
inform development of evidence-based awareness and outreach campaigns, tools and training to
help healthcare providers communicate credible information about vaccine effectiveness and
safety to Canadians. As a core part of vaccine confidence efforts, the Immunization Partnership
Fund is a grants and contributions program that supports public health actors and communities to
increase vaccine acceptance and uptake. It supports local, regional and national organizations,
and provinces and territories develop evidence-based approaches designed to improve vaccination
coverage rates and combat mis- and dis-information.
Measles is a notifiable disease in all provinces and territories (P/Ts). When a healthcare provider
diagnoses a case of measles, notification is also made to the respective jurisdictional public health
agency. This helps P/Ts implement measles prevention and control strategies as quickly as
possible. There is no specific antiviral medication for measles infection. However, treatment is
available to help relieve symptoms, and in some cases, treat or help to prevent severe
complications.
People with measles, or symptoms of measles, should isolate at home and away from others to
help prevent onward transmission, and call a health care provider immediately. When seeking
medical care, people should let their health care provider know ahead of time that they think they
have measles. Their health care provider will take appropriate precautions to help prevent the
spread to others.
Vaccination is the most effective prevention measure for measles. In addition to vaccination,
people can also use personal protective measures to help reduce their risk of getting or spreading a
respiratory infectious disease, like measles. This includes:
Staying home when sick
Wearing a well-fitting respirator or mask
Improving indoor ventilation, when possible
Cleaning their hands regularly
Covering coughs and sneezes with their elbow or a tissue, not their hands
Cleaning and disinfecting high-touch surfaces and objects
Measles Outbreaks Nationally and Internationally
As of May 22, 2024, seventy-seven cases have been reported in Canada this calendar year. Last
year, in 2023, twelve cases were reported in Canada, eleven of which were related to travel. This
indicates an increase in measles activity compared to the COVID-19 pandemic years during which
measles activity had declined significantly (1 case in 2020, 0 in 2021, 3 in 2022). However, it is
aligned with recent pre-pandemic years, where an average of 62 measles cases were reported each
year (ranged from 29 to 113 cases between 2017 and 2019). Public Health Ontario has reported a
death due to measles in a child under five who was unvaccinated.
As a nationally notifiable disease in Canada, every confirmed case of measles is reported by
provinces and territories to PHAC for national monitoring purposes. Deaths due to measles are
reported to PHAC annually. However, deaths that occur months or years after a measles infection
may not be reflected in PHAC’s annual report.
Measles deaths are extremely rare in highly vaccinated populations. There have not been any
reported measles deaths in Ontario since 1989. The most recent documented deaths from measles
in Canada were in 1989 in Quebec where 5 cases died during an outbreak of more than 10,000
cases.
No deaths from acute illness due to measles have been reported to PHAC since elimination of the
disease was achieved in Canada in 1998. However, it is possible that there have been a few deaths
attributed to Sub-acute Sclerosing Pan-encephalitis (SSPE) in Canada. SSPE is a rare and fatal
degenerative central nervous system disease that results from a measles virus infection acquired
earlier in life.
The United States (U.S) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides monthly updates on
the measles situation in the U.S. As of May 16, 2024, 139 measles cases were reported by 21
jurisdictions. In 2023, 58 cases were reported by 20 jurisdictions, and in 2022, 121 cases were
reported by 6 jurisdictions.
In late 2023 and into 2024, a large increase in measles is being reported worldwide, particularly in
the World Health Organization European Region. According to the European Centre for Disease
Prevention and Control’s risk assessment (published in May 2024), measles cases are expected to
continue increasing in European Union countries in the coming months due to sub-optimal
vaccination coverage; the high probability of importation from areas experiencing high measles
circulation; the seasonal peak of the virus, and the majority of new cases are associated with risk of
local and community exposure and transmission.
Measles vaccination
The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) recommends that routine immunization
for children 12 months to less than 13 years include 2 doses of measles-containing vaccine, using
either MMR or MMRV vaccine, which are highly effective at preventing infections.
Vaccination is not mandatory in Canada; however, some P/Ts, including British Columbia, Ontario,
and New Brunswick, require proof of vaccination for measles and other vaccine-preventable
diseases (VPDs) in order to register in public schools.
PHAC estimates vaccine coverage through the Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey,
conducted every two years. The latest survey completed in 2021 estimated that 92% of Canadian
children had received at least one dose of measles vaccine by two years of age and 79% of seven-
year-old children have received at least two doses. This is below the 95% coverage target for
measles vaccines.
Federal Role
PHAC works with P/Ts in the management of outbreaks of VPDs by providing technical advice and
assisting with laboratory testing when requested by a P/T. P/Ts and local public health are
responsible for delivering public health programs, including vaccination programs and investigation
and follow-up of measles cases and outbreaks.
The federal government has a role in regulatory approval of vaccines, national surveillance for VPDs
and adverse events following vaccination, bulk purchasing of vaccines, national leadership, and
coordination in knowledge development, innovation, and sharing of best practices.
Each week, PHAC receives measles surveillance data from P/Ts and reports cases to the Pan
American Health Organization. Weekly measles surveillance reports are publicly available on the
Canada.ca website.
MODERNIZING CANADA’S RESEARCH ECOSYSTEM
UPDATE ON BUDGET PROPOSAL
Budget 2024 announced the Government of Canada’s actions to modernize the federal support
system for scientific research and talent through:
Creation of a new capstone research funding organization. The granting councils will continue to
exist within this new organization, and continue supporting excellence in investigator-driven
research, including linkages with the Health portfolio;
Investment of $1.8 billion over five years, starting in 2024-25, with $748.3 million per year ongoing
to SSHRC, NSERC, and CIHR to increase core research grant funding and support Canadian
researchers;
Investment of $26.9 million over five years, starting in 2024-25, with $26.6 million in remaining
amortization and $6.6 million ongoing, to the granting councils to establish an improved and
harmonized grant management system;
Investment of $825 million over five years, starting in 2024-25, with $199.8 million per year ongoing,
to increase the annual value of master’s and doctoral student scholarships to $27,000 and
$40,000, respectively, and post-doctoral fellowships to $70,000. This will also increase the number
of research scholarships and fellowships provided, building to approximately 1,720 more graduate
students or fellows benefiting each year. To make it easier for students and fellows to access
support, the enhanced suite of scholarships and fellowship programs will be streamlined into one
talent program; and
Creation of the Council of Science and Innovation to be responsible for developing a National
Science and Innovation Strategy.
ISSUE
In October 2022, the Ministers of Health and of Innovation, Science and Industry (ISI) launched the
Advisory Panel on the Federal Research Support System to provide advice on modernizing the
federal support system with a specific focus on the relationship between the granting agencies (the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
(SSHRC) and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC)) and the Canada
Foundation for Innovation.
The Report of the Advisory Panel (i.e., Bouchard Report) was released in March 2023 and identified
a series of issues within the existing federal research support system (e.g., lagging investment
levels in research and talent, difficulties in supporting interdisciplinary/ multidisciplinary,
collaborative and international research, lack of independent science advisory functions and a
common vision for the ecosystem, and outdated approach to supporting Major Research
Facilities). The Bouchard Report also provided a series of 21 recommendations to address these
issues.
In response, the Government developed a comprehensive plan to modernize the federal support
system for scientific research and talent with complementary investments sought through Budget
2024.
KEY FACTS
To provide better coordination across the federally funded research ecosystem, the government will
create a new capstone research funding organization.The granting agencies (e.g., CIHR, SSHRC and
NSERC) will continue to exist within this new organization and and continue supporting excellence
in investigator-driven research, including linkages with the Health portfolio.
This new organization and structure will also help to advance internationally collaborative, multi-
disciplinary, and mission-driven research.
KEY MESSAGES
Science and research are key to solving the increasingly complex challenges facing Canada and the
world. Canada needs to attract talent, reduce brain drain, boost economic participation, and
maintain Canada’s scientific reputation and leadership, as well as ensure we can adequately
prepare for and respond to current and future health challenges.
That is why the Government of Canada announced a series of critical reinvestments and actions in
Budget 2024 to modernize the federal research support system.
This includes the creation of a new capstone research funding organization connecting the three
federal granting agencies, $1.8 billion over five years to increase core research grant funding and
support Canadian researchers, and $825 million over five years to increase the number and value
of graduate scholarships and post-doctoral fellowships to better support our next generation of
scientists and researchers.
The government will continue to work with the research community in the coming months to
advance these important modernization efforts.
IF PRESSED ON THE INCLUSION OF CIHR WITHIN THE NEW ORGANIZATION
The inclusion of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) within the new organization will
allow for health and public health to be at the forefront of priority setting for the organization as a
whole. In doing so, it will better enable Canada to leverage the strengths of our broad science and
research communities to address the complex challenges we face, including future health
emergencies.
As the pandemic illustrated, Canada’s vibrant health research enterprise is one of our core
strengths. As the Government moves forward with implementing these modernization efforts, we
will continue to engage with the health research community to mitigate potential risks that may
materially impact, now or later, research that is critical for our health and wellbeing.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2018 made significant investments in Canada’s higher-education research enterprise as
part of the government’s commitment to a new vision for Canadian science. A condition of Budget
2018 funding was that the Ministers of Science and Health were to report to Cabinet on progress in
advancing key elements of this science vision (e.g., enhancing coordination and agility within the
system, understanding the impacts of federal investments).
Following a comprehensive review at ISED of the practices, processes, and programs of the
granting agencies (Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC) and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC)), the Advisory Panel on the Federal Research Support System was launched in October
2022. The objective of the Advisory Panel was to provide further advice on modernizing the system
with a specific focus on the relationship between the granting agencies and the Canada Foundation
for Innovation (CFI). The Advisory Panel, chaired by Dr. Frédéric Bouchard of the Université de
Montréal, presented its report (i.e., the Bouchard Report) containing a series of 21
recommendations in March 2023.
In response to the Bouchard Report, the government developed a comprehensive modernization
plan for the federal support system for scientific research and talent. The plan is comprised of the
following components:
Creation of a new capstone research funding organization through connecting the three granting
agencies (CIHR, SSHRC and NSERC). The agencies will continue to exist within the new
organization;
Harmonization of existing trainee support programs (i.e., Tri-Agency and agency specific
scholarship and fellowship programs) and streamlining of the governance of the full suite of Tri-
Agency research and talent programs;
Re-investment in research and trainees to bring supports in line with international peers as well as
investment in a modernized IT system for the granting agencies;
Creation of a Council on Science and Innovation to provide the government with independent
policy advice;
Development of a whole-of-government national science and innovation strategy to align
capabilities and resources across the ecosystem;
Establishment of a senior level Science Ecosystem Committee to coordinate intramural and
extramural research in priority areas; and
Adoption of a new approach for federal support for Major Research Facilities.
STRENGTHENING THE REGULATORY OVERSIGHT OF NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS
ISSUE
There has been significant stakeholder concern related to recent initiatives to strengthen the
regulation of natural health products (NHPs).
The NHP industry has been very vocal about its opposition and has launched campaigns to gain
consumer and political support.
The Official Opposition is a supporter of the campaigns and introduced a Private Member’s Bill in
December 2023 to reverse the changes made by the 2023 Budget Implementation Act, which
provided the Department with additional authorities to keep Canadians safe.
The recent Health Canada initiatives aim to improve the safety of NHPs available to Canadians.
KEY FACTS
Health Canada supports access to safe and high-quality natural health products for Canadians.
These products are regulated under the Natural Health Products Regulations, which is a separate
regulatory framework compared to that of prescription drugs.
While NHPs are often perceived as lower-risk, they are not without risk, especially if products are
adulterated, if used improperly or in combination with other products and without appropriate
regulatory oversight.
Since introducing the regulatory framework for NHPs in 2004, Health Canada has seen cases of
safety issues and evidence of low regulatory compliance across the NHP industry.
In 2021, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development completed an audit
of the NHP program, which found both strengths and areas for improvement. The Department
committed to undertaking a number of activities to improve the safety of these products, including
introducing user fees that take small businesses into consideration.
Health Canada’s initiatives, including the introduction of additional post-market authorities for
NHPs through the 2023 Budget Implementation Act and the proposed introduction of cost-recovery
fees, will support the access of safe and high quality NHPs. These regulatory changes are not about
removing choice or reducing access. NHPs are important to Canadians to help support and
maintain their health and Health Canada is committed to ensuring the continued availability of
safe, effective and high-quality products.
KEY MESSAGES
While natural health products are generally lower risk products, they are not without risk.
Health Canada works continuously to create a safer marketplace for people in Canada. This
includes introducing new regulatory and legislative changes to improve the safety of natural health
products and respond to a changing marketplace.
We know how important natural health products, such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies,
and sunscreens, are in our daily routines. Yet, Health Canada has seen serious non-compliance
that could potentially be harmful to consumers, such as product contamination and the presence
of ingredients not listed on the label.
In 2021, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development completed an audit
of Health Canada's natural health product program and reported gaps in the regulatory oversight of
these products. Health Canada committed to undertaking a number of activities to improve the
safety of these products.
The Government has already introduced new labelling regulations to support consumers in making
informed choices and has been supporting stakeholders on the implementation of the regulations.
Health Canada is further consulting with stakeholders to identify additional flexibilities for the
labelling of natural health products.
Health Canada is proposing fees for industry to establish an inspection program that ensure
companies are following good manufacturing practices, and strengthen the post-market monitoring
of these products.
Our government understands the importance of small businesses to our economy and that is why
the fee proposal includes significant cost reductions for small businesses, such as reductions
ranging between 25% to 50%, and a full waiver for small businesses marketing their first product.
Health Canada is presently considering how best to adjust its fee proposal based on the thousands
of comments from stakeholders. The Department engaged stakeholders in March 2024 for further
discussions and continues to take feedback until May 25, 2024.
IF PRESSED ON WHY HEALTH CANADA IS PROPOSING FEES FOR NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS
Health Canada is proposing fees for industry to begin recouping a portion of the costs of services it
provides to industry and to expand its oversight to create a safer marketplace for consumers.
Presently, natural health products are the only line of health products whose regulatory activities
are fully funded by Canadian taxpayers.
The proposed fees would be accompanied by updated performance standards. This means
companies would have more predictable service delivery timelines for regulatory activities, such as
the scientific evaluation of new products and the licensing of new manufacturing sites.
Health Canada knows that many NHP companies are small businesses and is committed to
supporting them. The Department is considering measures to help alleviate the impact of fees on
businesses. This includes fee reductions for small businesses of 25% to 50% and a full waiver of
pre-market evaluation fees for small businesses marketing their first product.
Health Canada completed the review of the thousands of comments received on the fee proposal
and published a revised proposal in March 2024. The Department engaged stakeholders in March
2024 for further discussions and continues to take feedback until May 25, 2024.
IF PRESSED ON COST TO SMALL BUSINESSES
Small- and medium-sized businesses are the backbone of our economy, and we know they care for
the wellbeing of all Canadians. Just like them, we want to support the health of Canadians by
ensuring the products sold across the country are safe and effective.
Companies have been provided with several years, until 2028, to comply with the new labelling
requirements and the new legislative changes won’t affect those companies already following the
rules. Health Canada is further consulting with stakeholders to identify additional flexibilities for
the labelling of natural health products. We acknowledge the impact this may have on
implementation timelines for the new labelling requirements, and as such, this will be an integral
part of the consultations.
We understand that many small businesses worry about the additional costs new fees will bring.
This is why we have proposed significant measures to mitigate their impact, such as fee reductions
for small businesses ranging between 25% to 50%, and a full waiver of the pre-market evaluation
fee for small businesses marketing their first product.
Informed by the feedback received on its fee proposal, the Department published a revised
proposal in March 2024. The Department engaged stakeholders in March 2024 for further
discussions and continues to take feedback until May 25, 2024
IF PRESSED ON WHY CHANGES ARE NECESSARY NOW
Canadians should be able to trust that the natural health products on store shelves are safe and
contain what they say they contain, and that all safety information is available. While natural health
products are generally lower risk, that does not mean they are without risk.
These regulatory and legislative changes will create a safer marketplace and will help everyone
make more informed choices about the products that we value.
Between 2021 and 2023, there were 100 voluntary recalls of licensed natural health products for
safety issues including bacterial contamination and the presence of foreign matter such as
fibreglass in a product.
Health Canada conducted a pilot inspection program between March 2021 and March 2022 to
assess whether 36 manufacturers and importers were following regulatory requirements for good
manufacturing practices. All of the inspections identified compliance issues ranging in severity.
These findings support the need to educate industry about its regulatory obligations as well as to
increase oversight of the industry.
Right now, unlike with all other health products, natural health product manufacturing sites do not
have a regular cycle of inspections to ensure that companies adhere to quality standards. The fees
will provide Health Canada with the resources to conduct the necessary oversight and to ensure
that the products we use and trust are in fact safe, effective, and high quality.
IF PRESSED ON LIMITING ACCESS TO CANADIANS
We know how important natural health products, such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies,
and sunscreens, are for Canadians in their daily routines. Changes to the program will support
access to safe and high-quality natural health products.
We understand that many small businesses also worry about the additional cost the proposed new
fees will bring. That’s why Health Canada revised the initial proposal to help support them in
continuing to provide the variety of products consumers depend on.
IF PRESSED ON DRIVING CANADIANS TO PERSONAL IMPORTATION
We know how important natural health products, such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies,
and sunscreens, are for Canadians in their daily routines. That is why Health Canada has been
working to introduce important improvements to ensure that the natural health products they buy
and use every day are safe and of high-quality.
All domestic or international companies that sell natural health products – whether online or at
retail outlets in Canada must comply with Canadian regulations to keep people in Canada safe.
While residents of Canada and visitors are permitted to bring into Canada a personal use quantity
of a 90-day supply or single course of treatment of a natural health product, or any other health
product including a prescription drug, without requiring specific licences for the import, Canadians
are encouraged to buy licensed health products in Canada that have been assessed to be safe and
of high quality.
Health Canada works in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency to assess the
compliance of health products at the border against the Act and its Regulations.
Collecting fees for natural health products will let us support industry in complying with standards
through education and guidance and do more inspections so that consumers can use natural
health products without worry.
IF PRESSED ON DRIVING CANADIANS TO UNREGULATED (ILLEGAL) PRODUCTS
Our number one priority is to keep Canadians healthy and safe.
The Government of Canada supports access to safe and high-quality natural health products for
Canadians.
All domestic or international companies that sell natural health products in Canada – whether
online or at retail outlets – must comply with Canadian regulations.
Changes to the natural health products program will support access to safe and high quality natural
health products.
IF PRESSED ON WHY VANESSA’S LAW IS NEEDED
Extending the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act to natural health products allows
Health Canada to order a recall of a product or add warnings on labels to support safe use, if
necessary, which it couldn’t do before. These new authorities will only need to be used if a serious
risk to health is identified or if a company refuses to partake in voluntary mechanisms. The majority
of natural health product companies are not affected by these new authorities and they simply
serve to protect Canadians against what can be serious health risks.
Health Canada will consult with stakeholders on any further regulatory changes needed to support
these authorities.
IF PRESSED ON REGULATING NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS SIMILAR TO HIGHER-
RISK DRUGS
Health Canada continues to support access to safe and high-quality natural health products for the
people of Canada. Health Canada recognizes natural health products are lower-risk than
prescription drugs. That is why these products are regulated under the Natural Health Products
Regulations, which is a separate regulatory framework from that of prescription drugs.
While NHPs are generally lower risk, they are not without risk, with some issues reported before
such as contamination with foreign matter, mold, mildew, lead, arsenic, salmonella or E. coli.
Health Canada will continue to take action to protect the people of Canada.
The Government passed legislative changes in June 2023 that provide Health Canada with
additional abilities, such as to remove unsafe products from the market or require warnings on a
product label when a serious health risk is identified. Health Canada will only use these authorities
if a company refuses to take voluntary actions to address a risk.
IF PRESSED ON THE DELAY IN IMPLEMENTING THE SELF-CARE FRAMEWORK
Health Canada is advancing initiatives under the Self-Care Framework that meet the needs of
Canadians, including having labels that are easier to read and ensuring products can be promptly
recalled if a serious risk is identified.
Health Canada will continue to advance, in consultation with stakeholders, other aspects of the
Self-Care Framework over the next several years to ensure the regulatory oversight of both natural
health products and non-prescription drugs is proportional to risk.
IF PRESSED ON WHY HEALTH CANADA INTRODUCED NEW RULES FOR LABELLING
Health Canada introduced new requirements to make natural health product labels easier for
Canadians to read and understand, to address concerns about small font sizes and missing or
unclear safety information such as relating to contraindications or allergens.
Health Canada recognizes that label changes will take time for industry to implement. This is why
there is a multi-year transition period (up to six years) to implement the new regulations by 2028.
Health Canada has consulted extensively and has designed regulations that balance the burden to
industry while improving clear labelling for Canadians.
Health Canada is further consulting with stakeholders to identify additional flexibilities for the
labelling of natural health products.
BACKGROUND
Findings from the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development's Audit of the
Natural Health Product (NHP) Program
An audit of Canada’s NHP program was conducted in 2019 by the Commissioner of the
Environment and Sustainable Development (CESD), and the findings were published in a report to
Parliament in April 2021.
The focus of the audit was to determine whether Health Canada ensures that NHPs available for
sale in Canada are safe and accurately represented to consumers. The audit period covered
January 2017 to May 2020.
Overall, the audit by the Auditor General of Canada of the NHP Program identified both strengths
and areas for improvement.
The audit found that Health Canada licensed products appropriately, based on evidence of
safety and efficacy. The audit also found that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s
attention, immediate action was taken. Additionally, the audit established that Health Canada’s
approach to increase the supply of alcohol-based hand sanitizers during the pandemic was
appropriate.
The audit also identified areas for improvement:
the need for increased oversight of NHP quality,
greater monitoring of labels and advertising (including online),
improved labelling, and
proactive risk-based compliance and enforcement activities.
The recommendations validated key gaps that the Department had already identified and had
started working to address. The audit supports the direction Health Canada has been taking to
strengthen oversight of these products.
The auditors made five recommendations, all of which the Department has accepted and had
already started work to address.
The findings of the audit were reinforced in 2022 by the report issued by the Standing Committee on
Public Accounts (PACP) following a study of the audit.
The Self-Care Framework:
In 2016, the Department introduced the Self-Care Framework to modernize the regulation of self-
care products, including NHPs and non-prescription drugs.
The Self-Care Framework is intended to provide oversight proportional to risk and proposes to:
Better protect Canadians against health risks and harms – given that low risk is not no risk;
Reduce unnecessary regulatory burden and costs for industry and Canadians; and,
Support Canadians’ efforts to improve their own health and make informed decisions.
This proposal introduced Health Canada’s intention to improve NHP labelling, examine a cost
recovery approach for NHPs, as well as consider post-market tools for NHPs such as fines and
penalties and the ability to order a recall.
Health Canada continued broad public consultations in 2017, and announced, in 2018, a phased
approach to implementing the Self-Care Framework:
Element 1 encompassed changes to improve NHP labelling to ensure that labels are clear,
consistent, and easy to read. This was completed with the new regulations published in July 2022.
Element 2 will introduce regulatory amendments to create a more risk-based approach to the
regulatory oversight for non-prescription drugs (OTCs).
Element 3 introduces changes to improve oversight for NHPs, including quality, post-market
authorities under Vanessa’s Law and cost recovery.
Industry associations are diverse in terms of both make-up of members and their interest in the
Self-Care Framework:
Cosmetics Alliance Canada (CAC), which represents OTCs, NHPs and cosmetics (regulated under
separate regulations), is focused on advancing all elements of the Framework to ensure a more
consistent regulatory approach for cosmetics and cosmetic-like NHPs and OTCs.
The Canadian Health Food Association (CHFA), which represents a broad range of NHP
stakeholders (including small and medium sized manufacturers and retailers), has consistently
raised concern regarding the impacts on the industry of various changes happening at the same
time.
Food, Health and Consumer Products Canada (FHCP), which represents many large multinational
drug companies who manufacture both NHPs and OTCS (such as Pfizer, Johnson and Johnson, and
Bayer) has been supportive of measures to better align NHP and OTC regulatory oversight. Their
principal concern is a lack of progress on Element 2 of the Framework.
Currently, industry associations are advocating for the Framework to be completed as initially
outlined by Health Canada in 2018, prior to advancing initiatives such as NHP cost recovery, which
was expedited in part due to the results of the 2021 program audit and the related action plan to
respond to the findings.
Key associations representing consumer and patient safety, such as the Institute for Safe
Medication Practices Canada, are supportive of stronger oversight and greater alignment with other
health products under the Self-Care Framework.
Over the past 7 years, Health Canada has consulted extensively with stakeholders regarding
proposed changes to the regulation of Self-Care products and will continue to be open and
transparent as it works to implement other elements of the Self-Care Framework over the next
several years.
Improved Natural Health Product Labelling:
Health Canada amended the Natural Health Products Regulations to support consistent and
prominent labelling of key information to support consumers in selecting and using NHPs,
including:
Larger font size and better contrast;
Important product information, such as warnings and directions for use, would be required in a
facts table;
Consistent and prominent labelling of priority allergens; and
Modernized contact information on the package such as a website.
The Department has been consulting on this initiative since 2016 in the context of the Self-Care
Framework and has made a public commitment in February 2018 to introduce these changes as
the first phase of the Self-Care Framework.
An audit of Canada’s NHP program was conducted by the Commissioner of the Environment and
Sustainable Development (CESD) and the findings were published in a report to Parliament in April
2021. This report noted that information on NHP labels was not easy to read. The recommendations
listed in the report included improving the labelling of NHPs to ensure that information on product
labels is clear, consistent and legible for consumers and can be read without the need for a
magnification tool. In the formal response to the report, Health Canada committed to addressing
this recommendation through these amendments.
The changes in the labelling regulations and related guidance were the outcome of extensive
consultations with industry, patient safety organizations, and healthcare professionals.
To support industry in implementing these changes, the Department put in place a multi-year
transition period ending June 2028. The multi-year transition period will minimize the environmental
impact and costs for companies by allowing most companies to make the label changes at the
normal re-labelling timeline of their products and enable most companies to use their existing
stock without having to recall or destroy existing product.
Vanessa’s Law Powers:
Health Canada has observed evidence of low regulatory compliance across the NHPs industry as
well as potential safety issues which highlight the need for more robust systems to ensure
regulatory compliance. For example:
Since 2004, approximately 470 voluntary NHP recalls have been issued.
From 2004 until December 2021, Health Canada received reports of over 8,000 adverse reactions in
which NHPs use had a suspected role, of which over 5,000 were serious.
Since 2016-17, Health Canada received over 3,500 consumer complaints implicating NHPs. This
includes cases where products were contaminated with mold, mildew, lead, arsenic, and other
toxic elements.
The 2021 audit by the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development and by
Health Canada’s own inspections of NHP manufacturing sites noted significant non-compliance
gaps that required effective regulatory tools to manage, such as those in Vanessa’s Law.
The Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (also known as Vanessa’s Law) received Royal
Assent in November 2014 and amended the Food Drugs Act to give Health Canada additional
transparency, post-market monitoring, and compliance and enforcement tools for therapeutic
products such as prescription and over-the-counter drugs, biologic drugs, and medical devices.
Through the Budget Implementation Act, these tools have been extended to NHPs as of June 22,
2023.
Some authorities came into force upon Royal Assent to support immediate program
enhancements, including the provisions to:
1. order the recall of NHPs that present a serious or imminent risk of injury to human health
2. require a label change/package modification, if necessary to prevent serious injury to health
3. impose higher fines and penalties e.g., for having unauthorized products on the market
4. order a person to provide information that is in the person’s control and is necessary to
determine if a product presents a serious risk of injury to human health
5. disclose confidential business information in circumstances where the product may present a
serious risk of injury to human health or for the protections or promotion of human health or the
safety of the public
6. apply for a court injunction to stop or prevent the commission of an offence
7. prohibit false or misleading statements or information
8. incorporate by reference
9. apply for a court injunction to stop or prevent the commission of an offence
10. make publicly available any order of a recall, label change, tests and studies, and assessment.
The remaining authorities noted below have a delayed coming into force and an Order in Council
and/or regulations are needed to bring them into force. When and how these regulations come into
force for these provisions will be subject to consultation.
1. Power to require an assessment
2. Power to require tests or studies
3. Ability to add terms and conditions
4. Mandatory reporting of serious reactions by healthcare institutions
5. Duty of the Minister to publicize certain clinical trial information
The powers under the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act allow unsafe NHPs to be more
quickly removed from the market, protecting Canadians from serious or imminent health risks. This
will also help increase consumer confidence in NHPs on the market.
Some NHP industry stakeholders remain opposed to the extension of Vanessa’s Law powers to
NHPs. The Natural Health Products Protection Association (NHPPA), an active stakeholder
advocating to repeal the elements of the Budget Implementation Act pertaining to Vanessa’s Law,
led the drafting of a Private Member’s Bill (Bill C-368) for this purpose.
On December 5, 2023, MP Blaine Calkins (CPC) introduced Bill C-368 – An Act to amend the Food
and Drugs Act (natural health products) to exclude NHPs from Vanessa’s Law. The first hour of the
second reading of the Bill C-368 occurred May 6, 2024.
NHP Fee Proposal:
Health Canada has noted throughout the development of the Self-Care Framework, and in its
response to the 2021 Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development audit of the
NHP program, that expanding fees to NHPs is critical to strengthening the NHP program to meet the
needs of Canadians and support its long-term sustainability.
The fee revenues would enable Health Canada to strengthen its oversight of NHPs, monitor
labelling and advertising, and put in place a permanent inspection program. The increased revenue
would also help improve Health Canada’s ability to:
detect and respond to quality issues;
address issues of non-compliance for unlicensed products; and
prevent harmful products from making their way into the marketplace.
The proposed fees reflect the costs associated with performing regulatory activities for NHPs. Three
types of fees are proposed that include significant cost reductions for small businesses:
Fees to evaluate applications for new NHPs or to amend existing NHPs (starting as low as $562 for
qualifying small businesses on the simplest applications to $58,332 for the most complex
applications, which are expected to be very rare);
Fees to assess new NHP site licence applications or amendments to existing site licences ($3,588
for qualifying small businesses and $4,784 for larger businesses), and an annual site licence fee to
support site licence renewal and compliance and enforcement activities for products that are
already on the market (ranging from $5,191 for qualifying small business labelling facilities to
$40,071 for larger business sterile manufacturing facilities); and
Annual “right” to sell fees to allow companies the right to sell their NHPs in Canada ($406.50 for
qualifying small businesses and $542 for larger businesses annually).
Performance standards are also proposed for each of the fee lines, ranging from 30 days to 210
days depending on the complexity of the review required.
While the proposed fees are also important to ensure the safety, reliability and quality of our NHPs,
we are considering a number of measures to help alleviate the impact of these fees on businesses,
such as fee reductions for small businesses (companies with fewer than 100 employees or
between $30,000 and $5M in annual revenue) ranging between 25% to 50%, and a full waiver for
small businesses on their first pre-market evaluation.
The Department held a public consultation on its fee proposal from May 12, 2023, to August 10,
2023, as well as stakeholder information sessions to explain the proposal and respond to
questions. Health Canada is actively reviewing thousands of comments on its fee proposal,
including the fee reduction for small businesses, as part of an open and transparent consultation
process with Canadians and businesses.
The Department published a revised proposal in March 2024. The Department engaged
stakeholders in March 2024 for further discussions and continues to take feedback until May 25,
2024.
PERFLUOROALKYLATED AND POLYFLUOROALKYLATED SUBSTANCES (PFAS)
ISSUE
The Government of Canada has published a draft State of PFAS report. This draft report proposes
that PFAS as a class may cause harm to both human health and the environment. There is a
considerable amount of public interest in this very large group of substances.
KEY FACTS
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a class of over 4,700 human-made substances
referred to as “forever chemicals” because they are extremely persistent in the environment.
These substances are used in many industrial sectors, in certain firefighting foams, and in a wide
range of products, including food packaging, non-stick cookware, cosmetics, textiles, vehicle parts,
and electronics. PFAS are found nearly everywhere in the Canadian environment (ambient air,
indoor air, dust, and drinking water) and in people living in Canada, even in remote regions.
Scientific evidence to date indicates that certain PFAS are associated with adverse effects on the
environment and on human health, and the Government of Canada has taken action to address
some sub-groups of PFAS.
On May 20, 2023, the Government published a draft State of PFAS report that summarizes the
current scientific evidence on these chemicals and proposes that PFAS as a class may cause harm
to both human health and the environment, i.e., meets the definition of “toxic” under section 64 of
the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA).
Comments on the State of PFAS report and risk management scope are being considered and a
summary of public comments and responses is expected to be published in the coming months.
Additional opportunities for stakeholder engagement will be provided during subsequent steps.
If the assessment conclusions are confirmed, the Government will propose actions to address
identified risks, including controls for PFAS in firefighting foams as well as options to minimize
environmental and human exposure from other sources and products.
The Government will also continue to invest in monitoring of PFAS in human and environmental
samples, and in research on their potential human health and environmental effects.
In February 2023, Health Canada in collaboration with provinces, territories, and other federal
departments proposed a new group-based objective for PFAS in drinking water that is expected to
be finalized in the summer of 2024. This new group-based objective will reduce Canadians’
exposure to PFAS in drinking water.
KEY MESSAGES
Health Canada and Environment and Climate Change Canada are addressing PFAS as a class
because people living in Canada are exposed to many of these chemicals every day and emerging
science shows they are harmful to human health and the environment.
Publication of the draft state of PFAS report was an important step in the process of managing these
substances. The Government is working towards publishing the next PFAS documents as soon as
possible and, if the conclusions are confirmed, will take action to manage identified risks.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT ACTIONS TO ADDRESS PFAS
While science has been evolving regarding the risks of PFAS, the Government of Canada has not
waited to act and has prohibited three subgroups of PFAS.
The Government of Canada has also proposed a new more stringent objective for PFAS in drinking
water, led a nomination of a subset of these substances for global action under the Stockholm
Convention and is developing an approach to consider the risk posed by biosolids contaminated
with PFAS and to protect the safety of Canadian agriculture.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT ACTIONS TO PROTECT PEOPLE IN SAGENUAY FROM PFAS
The Government of Canada has proposed a new draft objective for PFAS in drinking water with the
aim to reduce potential exposure to multiple PFAS considering them as a group instead of
individual chemicals.
The Government of Canada is supporting the province of Quebec through guidance on health
effects, testing protocols and water treatment strategies for contaminants in drinking water.
Questions about specific contaminated sites should be addressed to the responsible federal
authority.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT ACTIONS TO PROTECT PEOPLE FROM PFAS IN CONSUMER & SELF-
CARE PRODUCTS, INCLUDING COSMETICS
Publication of the draft state of PFAS report is an important step in the process of managing these
harmful substances.
The Government is considering what actions are needed to protect people in Canada and their
environment from PFAS, including PFAS used in certain products.
The Government of Canada has a number of tools available under the Canadian Environmental
Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA), Canada Consumer Product Safety Act, and the Food and Drugs Act to
take action on products, including cosmetics, that demonstrate a risk to the health and safety of
people in Canada.
BACKGROUND
In April 2021, the Government of Canada published a Notice of Intent to move forward with
activities to address the broad class of PFAS. The notice indicated that substance-specific
information is lacking for many PFAS that are currently used and, while risk management measures
are already in place for a number of PFAS, the scientific evidence to date indicates that other PFAS
may also have associated environmental and/or human health effects. Considering PFAS as a class
of chemicals better addresses situations where exposure occurs to multiple PFAS, and allows the
Government to consider cumulative effects and to prevent substituting a regulated PFAS with an
unregulated PFAS that possess equally or more hazardous properties (i.e., regrettable substitution).
Stakeholders were invited to provide initial feedback or indicate their interest in engaging in further
discussions.
Other Government of Canada Actions on PFAS
Existing Regulations
The Government of Canada has taken action under CEPA to prohibit the manufacture, use, sale and
import of certain subclasses of PFAS (perfluorooctonate sulfonate [PFOS], perfluorooctanoic acid
[PFOA] and long-chain perfluorocarboxylic acids [LC-PFCAs]) and products containing these
substances, subject to certain limited exceptions and permitted activities.
CEPA’s New Substances Notification Regulations ensure that no new substances, including new
PFAS, are introduced into the Canadian marketplace before undergoing ecological and human
health assessments, and that appropriate control measures have been taken, when required.
Canada’s New Substances Program has taken preventative action against potentially harmful new
PFAS and will continue to ensure that new PFAS that are imported or manufactured in Canada are
assessed and risk managed, as required.
Existing Guidelines
Federal Environmental Quality Guidelines for PFOS have been developed for surface water, fish
tissue, wildlife diet, and bird egg. Canadian Soil and Groundwater Quality Guidelines have also
been developed for PFOS. The development of guidelines for other PFAS is under consideration.
In February 2023, Health Canada proposed an objective for total detectable PFAS in drinking water.
Once finalized, the objective will replace the existing guidelines for PFOS and PFOA, and screening
values for nine other PFAS. The objective is lower than the existing maximum values, further
protecting people in Canada.
Addressing Fire-Fighting Foams
In 2021, Health Canada and Environment and Climate Change Canada announced an action plan
to protect firefighters from harmful chemicals released during household fires. The plan outlines a
series of actions such as conducting research and monitoring of firefighters’ level of exposure to
chemicals, including PFAS.
The Government of Canada continues to take action to reduce the environmental and human
health risks from known federal contaminated sites through the Federal Contaminated Sites Action
Plan, including those impacted with PFAS associated with the historic use of PFAS containing
firefighting foams. Non-federal PFAS contaminated sites also exist in Canada; these are under the
jurisdiction of the provinces, territories and/or municipal health authorities.
Addressing Biosolids
The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) is working with Environment and Climate Change
Canada, Health Canada and provincial governments to develop a coordinated approach to
consider the potential concern associated with biosolids contaminated with PFAS, and to protect
the safety of Canadian agriculture. In May 2023, the CFIA proposed an interim standard for
products that are imported or sold as fertilizers or supplements. CFIA engaged with stakeholders
and provincial governments in the summer of 2023 to seek feedback on their proposed interim
standard. A further 60-day public consultation was held between December 2023 and February
2024. Comments received were generally supportive of the proposal and the CFIA anticipates
publishing the new interim standard during spring 2024.
International Efforts
In 2021, Canada nominated LC-PFCAs, their salts and related compounds for addition to the
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. This international environmental treaty
aims to eliminate or restrict the production and use of persistent organic pollutants.
Research and Monitoring
The Government of Canada conducts regular monitoring and surveillance of certain PFAS in the
environment, wildlife and people living in Canada. The data show that while the levels of certain
PFAS have decreased over time in the Canadian population, other PFAS continue to increase in
certain sub-populations.
The Government of Canada continues to examine the potential health effects of PFAS, such as their
potential contribution to metabolic diseases and their effects on potentially disproportionately
impacted populations (including pregnant people, and children). Research to understand
firefighter's exposure to chemicals, including PFAS, is also underway.
Ongoing surveillance of PFAS in foods through the Total Diet Study is required to ensure levels do
not increase. Additionally, a range of activities associated with the environmental concerns of
PFAS, such as research on the accumulation and toxicity of certain PFAS in organisms, and
extensive monitoring in various ecosystems and wildlife, have taken place and are ongoing.
PATENTED MEDICINE PRICES REVIEW BOARD
ISSUE
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) is an independent quasi-judicial body that
protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented medicines
sold in Canada are not excessive.
KEY FACTS
On July 1, 2022, Health Canada’s amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR) came
into force. These amendments include a new basket of comparator countries and reduced
reporting requirements for those medicines at lowest risk of excessive pricing (e.g., over-the-
counter drugs and generic medicines).
The Board of the PMPRB may issue non-binding Guidelines to operationalize the PMR. Since the
coming into force of the regulatory amendments, no new Guidelines have been put in place. Interim
Guidance to inform stakeholders of the approach for conducting price reviews during this period
was adopted in July 2022 and updated in September 2023. A Guidance development process is
now underway to implement regulatory amendments, and to give effect to the Board’s commitment
to modernize and simplify its framework. The PMPRB wishes to finalize new Guidelines during 2024.
The Board is conducting consultations, in stages, as part of its new Guidelines development
process.
As part of the ongoing process to update its Guidelines and informed by its late 2023 consultation
efforts, the PMPRB plans to publish a Discussion Guide in summer 2024. The Discussion Guide will
provide material to continue an informed, focused, and productive consultation.
The Board subsequently intends to publish new draft Guidelines before the end of 2024 following
due consideration of the feedback received on the two previous phases, before finalization and
implementation, anticipated in 2025.
The PMPRB is overseen by a Board, appointed by the Governor in Council. There are five current
Board members: Chairperson Thomas Digby, Vice-Chairperson Anie Perrault, and members
Carolyn Kobernick, Emily Reynen and Peter Moreland-Giraldeau.
KEY MESSAGES
Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
IF PRESSED ON HOW SAVINGS WILL BE ACHIEVED AS A RESULT OF AMENDMENTS TO THE
PATENTED MEDICINES REGULATIONS
In July 2022, amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations came into force. These
amendments were designed to provide the PMPRB with new tools to carry out its mandate of
protecting Canadians from excessive prices for patented medicines and improve access for
Canadians to quality medicines.
The new amendments include an 11-country basket of comparator countries, which removes the
United States and Switzerland and includes countries that are more like Canada economically and
from a consumer price protection standpoint.
The revised basket of comparator countries is estimated to have an impact on patented medicine
expenditures by reducing spending by $2.9 billion over ten years. The way in which the PMPRB
operationalizes the amendments through its Guidelines may impact projected benefits. The new
basket is expected to result in lower drug prices for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTH CANADA SUBMISSION OR QUESTIONS ABOUT ANY POTENTIAL
INTERFERENCE IN THE BOARD’S DECISION
PMPRB is an independent quasi-judicial body and is responsible for the development and
implementation of its Guidelines. As stated in section 96(5) of the Patent Act, the PMPRB must
consult with various parties, including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines.
It is in that context that former Minister of Health, Minister Duclos wrote to the chair of the PMPRB
to share his views with respect to the proposed Guidelines.
As part of the PMPRB’s consultation process, Health Canada sent a submission to the Board on
December 5, 2022, asking it to consider pausing the consultation process, to allow time to work
collaboratively with health system partners and stakeholders, including provinces and territories, to
understand fully the short and long-term impacts of the proposed new Guidelines.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF PMPRB OFFICIAL
Officials working as staff within the PMPRB are public servants, and the PMPRB is responsible for
its own staffing. Questions about human resources and staffing at the PMPRB should be directed to
PMPRB.
IF PRESSED ON PMPRB’S CURRENT CAPACITY TO PROTECT CANADIANS FROM EXCESSIVE
PRICES OF PATENT MEDICINES
The PMPRB was established under the Patent Act and reports into Parliament through the Minister
of Health. It does and will continue to play an important role in exercising its authority as an
independent body to oversee the prices of patented medicines in Canada and ensure that
Canadians are not paying excessive prices.
The PMPRB and its legal framework are an important part of the pharmaceutical landscape, and the
Government of Canada is committed to the mandate of the PMPRB and its role in protecting
consumers against excessive prices of patented medicines.
IF PRESSED ON GUIDELINES
Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
Specific questions regarding next steps with respect to the Guidelines should be directed to
PMPRB.
IF PRESSED ON THE PMPRB
As an arm’s-length organization of the government, the PMPRB reviews the prices patentees charge
for patented drug products in the Canadian market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve
voluntary price reductions, or the board can hold public hearings to determine whether a price is
excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND DRUG ACCESS
The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing over
the next ten years in Canada.
BACKGROUND
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the
government, reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian
market to ensure that they are not being sold at a price that the PMPRB finds to be “excessive”. The
PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions or hold public hearings to
determine whether a price is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess
revenues.
The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to refer matters to the PMPRB, which
in turn is required to inquire into the matter and report its findings back to the Minister. Additionally,
the Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the Patented
Medicines Regulations (PMR), which form part of the PMPRB’s legislative framework.
On July 1, 2022, Health Canada’s amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR) came
into force. These amendments, including a new basket of comparator countries and reduced
reporting requirements for those medicines at lowest risk of excessive pricing (e.g., over-the-
counter drugs and generic medicines), provide the PMPRB with more updated tools to prevent
excessive pricing for patented medicines. The price reporting requirements for the new basket of
countries have been in force since July 1, 2022. The PMPRB has therefore received from regulated
parties the new pricing information respecting the new basket of comparator countries for all of
2022.
The new basket of comparator countries removes the United States and Switzerland and includes
countries with similar consumer protection priorities, economic wealth and marketed medicines as
Canada. The basket now comprises of Australia, Belgium, Japan, Netherlands, Norway and Spain,
along with France, Germany, Italy, Sweden and United Kingdom, which have always been included.
The total quantified benefit of the revised basket, calculated through a cost-benefit analysis
conducted in 2017, estimated the impact of the regulatory amendment on patented medicine
prices to be $2.9 billion over ten years (according to the June 2022 Regulatory Impact Analysis
Statement). While the estimated impact for the cost-benefit analysis was conducted in a
comprehensive manner using reasonable assumptions, some differences in the benefits and costs
relating to the amendments that came into force can be expected.
In addition, the PMPRB's upcoming Guidelines that operationalize the regulatory amendments, the
extent to which rights holders voluntarily comply with the Guidelines, and, the extent to which the
Guidelines are an appropriate application of the Act and Regulations, may all have an impact on the
projected benefits.
On June 30, 2022, in anticipation of the coming into force of the amendments to the PMR on July 1,
2022, the PMPRB published Interim Guidelines for establishing non-excessive prices for drugs
launched during the period of time between the coming into force of the PMR and the publication of
the Final Guidelines.
Subsequently, on October 6, 2022, Draft Guidelines were published with a 60-day Notice and
Comment Period ending December 5, 2022. The PMPRB expressed the intention to issue Final
Guidelines by the end of the year and have the Final Guidelines come into effect on January 1,
2023. In addition to the new Schedule of 11 comparator countries, the Draft Guidelines contained a
number of substantive changes as part of the Board’s modernization efforts.
On November 10, 2023, the PMPRB released a Scoping Paper outlining themes and questions to
inform its Guideline development. On December 5 and 6, 2023, interested stakeholders were
invited to participate in a Policy Roundtable to discuss the paper further. In addition, the PMPRB
received 70 written submissions in December 2023. Most submissions were put forth by Rights
Holders and Industry Associations (51%), followed by patient advocacy groups (21%) and
pharmacy and distributors (10%).
On November 28, 2022, the former Minister of Health wrote to the Acting Chairperson of the PMPRB
asking that the Board consider pausing the consultation process to allow time to fully understand
the short and long-term impacts of the proposed guidelines. This letter was written in context of
section 96(5) of the Patent Act, which states that the PMPRB must consult with various parties,
including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines.
In December 2022, the PMPRB announced that it would not implement the proposed new
Guidelines on January 1, 2023, as they had previously indicated. PMPRB communicated that the
Interim Guidelines would remain in place until further notice. On June 20, 2023, the PMPRB
published a proposed Amendment to the Interim Guidance regarding new medicines for a 60-day
notice and comment period ending August 21, 2023. On September 27, 2023 the Board announced
its decision to adopt the proposed Amended Interim Guidance, effective immediately. The Board
also indicated its intention to launch an iterative consultation process, conducted in stages with
stakeholders with an aim to develop new guidelines in 2024.
In December 2022, Mélanie Bourassa Forcier, Vice-Chairperson and Acting Chairperson of PMPRB,
confirmed her resignation and in February 2023, Matthew Herder confirmed his resignation from
the Board and published his resignation letter online. Douglas Clark, Executive Director (a public
servant who reports to the Chairperson) announced that he would remain as a special advisor for a
specified period, but resigned from his Executive Director position in February 2023.
In February 2023, the Government of Canada announced the appointment of Thomas J. Digby as
the chairperson of the PMPRB and on August 10, 2023 Anie Perrault was appointed as the vice-
chairperson of the Board. In October 2023 the Government of Canada announced appointments of
Peter Moreland Giraldeau and Dr. Emily A. Reynen to the Board. All terms are for five years,
following an open, merit-based and transparent selection processes.
On March 9, 2023, the Standing Committee on Health (HESA) adopted a motion to conduct a study
on the PMPRB and invited the following witnesses, in addition to any further witnesses the
committee may consider relevant: the Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, then Minister of Health;
Matthew Herder, former member of the PMPRB; Mélanie Bourassa Forcier, former acting chair,
PMPRB; and Douglas Clark, former executive director, PMPRB.
On April 27, 2023, HESA commenced its study on the PMPRB. Then Minister Jean-Yves Duclos
made a statement and, along with Deputy Stephen Lucas, Éric Belair and T. Nessim Abu-Zahra,
answered questions. Mélanie Bourassa Forcier, former acting chairperson of the Board also made a
statement and answered questions. The study continued on May 2, 2023, with Matthew Herder,
former Board member, and Douglas Clark, outgoing executive director, PMPRB, each making
opening statements and answering questions. On May 4, 2023 HESA passed a motion that
witnesses produce correspondence they consider relevant to support their testimony to the
committee. These documents have been published online.
On May 6, 2024, the HESA committee reported its findings and recommendations to the House and
published its report entitled "The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board: Ensuring the
Effectiveness of the Reform Process". HESA is requesting that the government table a
comprehensive response to the report.
AMENDMENTS TO THE FOOD AND DRUGS ACT (PRECISION REGULATING)
ISSUE
Canada’s regulations of general application governing the sale of health products and food work
well in most situations, however issues can arise that require tailored regulatory approaches.
The proposed amendments to the Food and Drugs Act will enable timely, precise regulatory
solutions to help mitigate issues such as product shortages, areas of unmet need or potential
health risks or adverse effects.
The proposed authorities would not displace the normal functioning of the Food and Drugs Act and
its regulations, but rather provide the Minister of Health with complementary tools to achieve the
right outcomes for people in Canada.
KEY FACTS
Health Canada regulates health products (such as drugs, medical devices and natural health
products) and food to make sure they are safe for people in Canada.
The Government is proposing responsive regulatory tools that would allow Health Canada to better
respond to situations that can affect product availability or safety.
These new tools will allow Health Canada to create timely, tailored regulatory solutions to get
access to safe, effective, high-quality products for Canadians.
The development of any Ministerial Orders under these new authorities would be done
transparently, be informed by engagement with affected stakeholders, and maintain Health
Canada’s high scientific and regulatory standards.
If approved by Parliament, most of the new legislative authorities would be available immediately
upon Royal Assent however they will require Ministerial orders to bring them into force. Health
Canada will engage implicated stakeholders on any proposed orders – for example, to add
supplementary rules for certain nicotine replacement therapies.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government is proposing amendments to the Food and Drugs Act that will enable timely,
precise regulatory solutions to issues such as maintaining product availability, meeting areas of
unmet need or protecting against health risks or adverse effects.
Where a situation requiring action has been identified and where the thresholds have been met, the
proposed measures would enable the Minister to:
Put in place targeted exemptions from specific regulatory requirements, while ensuring that health
and safety standards are met;
Rely on information or decisions from select regulatory authorities to satisfy specific regulatory
requirements; or
Put in place supplementary rules for certain therapeutic products to protect against potential
health risks or adverse effects.
IF PRESSED ON THE EXEMPTION AUTHORITY
It is impossible to predict all possible scenarios that can affect the availability of needed health
products and food in Canada, as we have seen in recent shortage situations.
The proposed exemption authority would provide Health Canada with a way to create regulatory
solutions transparently, and at times very rapidly.
Exemption Orders could only be made for a health, safety or public interest purpose, and only when
the exemption would not create an unacceptable risk or uncertainty.
IF PRESSED ON THE RELIANCE (DEEMING) AUTHORITY
Relying on decisions made by select, trusted international regulators to meet the requirements of
the Food and Drugs Act can help remove barriers to getting needed products to the Canadian
market.
This authority would be a discretionary tool used to address an identified need in Canada.
Reliance Orders could only be made for a health, safety or public interest purpose, and only when
the exemption would not create an unacceptable risk or uncertainty.
IF PRESSED ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY RULES AUTHORITY
This authority would enable Health Canada to add additional regulatory requirements to protect
against potential health risks or adverse effects from certain types of therapeutic products.
This authority would help us to put better controls in place for therapeutic products that have the
potential to cause health or safety issues, for example if they are accessed by children or youth.
BACKGROUND
Products regulated by Health Canada must meet certain requirements to ensure that they are safe,
work as intended, and are of high quality. The Food and Drugs Act and its associated regulations set
out the requirements that must be followed when pursuing certain activities including the
manufacturing, importing, exporting, and selling of therapeutic products (drugs, medical devices,
natural health products) and food in Canada, with additional requirements for food set out in the
Safe Food for Canadians Act and its associated regulations. These legislative and regulatory
frameworks are designed as rules of general application to provide consistency, certainty,
transparency and fairness in the regulation of therapeutic products and food.
While the Food and Drugs Act and its regulations contain some tools to address exceptional issues,
no existing tool is sufficiently flexible to allow Health Canada to respond with timely, tailored
solutions to a range of situations, including urgent situations. While Health Canada continuously
updates its regulations to ensure that these frameworks work as intended to protect the health and
safety of people in Canada, Health Canada needs more flexible regulatory tools to mitigate
situations that can affect product availability or impact health or safety, at times very rapidly.
The increased frequency of supply chain issues such shortages of drugs and infant formula, areas
of unmet need in Canada, and potential health risks or adverse effects associated with
unauthorized product use, have underscored the need for precise and sometimes very rapid
regulatory solutions.
These measures build on previous calls from stakeholders to institute greater regulatory flexibility in
appropriate circumstances, including through reliance on information and decisions of foreign
regulatory authorities. Many sectors of the health and agri-food communities are expected to be
supportive of measures that would help facilitate safe access to therapeutic products and foods or
protect against potential health risks or adverse effects.
If approved by Parliament, the new legislative authorities would be available immediately upon
Royal Assent however they will require Ministerial orders to bring them into force. Ministerial orders
are a type of regulation, subject to the Statutory Instruments Act and Cabinet Directive on
Regulation, which set out expectations for consultation and transparency, for example. During the
development of any orders under the new authorities, Health Canada will engage with implicated
stakeholders. Consultations regarding potential supplementary rules for certain nicotine
replacement therapies are expected to take place in parallel with Parliament’s consideration of the
Budget Implementation Act.
RAPID TESTS
ISSUE
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada procured and distributed millions
of rapid tests to support rapid testing programs across the country with the aim to limit the spread
of the virus.
The Government of Canada built substantial federal reserves of rapid tests in the event of a
potential resurgence and, given diminishing demand, has been divesting of the surplus tests to
minimize volumes going unused prior to their expiration in 2024.
KEY FACTS
Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over 811 million rapid
tests, at a total cost of $5B.
During this period, the Government shipped 687 million rapid tests to provinces and territories (PTs)
based on PT demand projections.
More than 8 million rapid tests were shipped to registered charities, non-profit organizations, and
Northern, remote and isolated communities.
The federal role in procurement of rapid tests as part of pandemic support to PTs concluded in
December 2022. Activities relating to this role, such as managing test stocks, continue but are
winding down following conclusion of procurement.
There are currently about 65 million rapid tests in the federal inventory for emergency support, if
needed.
Since spring 2023, approximately 1 million tests have been divested of through the GCDonate
platform to charities, non-profits, public institutions, and others.
The majority of tests in the federal inventory do not expire until late 2024.
KEY MESSAGES
Since 2020, the Government of Canada has provided provinces and territories with a free supply of
rapid tests to sustain testing programming and to foster provincial and territorial reserves, while
also building a federal inventory for emergency response.
Demand for tests from the federal inventory will likely remain low.
The Government of Canada continues to distribute and facilitate access to rapid tests to minimize
the risk that they will go unused prior to expiry.
IF PRESSED ON THE SIZE OF THE FEDERAL RAPID TEST INVENTORY
In response to the Omicron wave, provincial and territorial demand for rapid tests increased
dramatically.
Canada used its buying power to secure extremely limited global supply and proactively built
reserves, in close collaboration with the provinces and territories, in the event of future Omicron-
like waves.
IF PRESSED ON PLANS FOR THE INVENTORY
Canada has been strategically managing the supply of rapid tests by:
working with manufacturers for direct delivery where appropriate;
reviewing and validating expiry dates periodically and as required;
working with manufacturers to extend shelf life; and
shipping inventory with the shortest shelf life first.
Canada does not plan to replenish the federal inventory as product expires.
IF PRESSED ON PROCUREMENT
With a commitment to openness, fairness, and transparency, Canada secured rapid tests when
global supply was very limited, leveraging Public Services and Procurement Canada’s standard
procurement mechanisms such as Request for Standing Offers.
As the pandemic evolved, procurement decisions were made, reviewed, and updated based on
demand projections in consultation with provinces and territories, stakeholders, and partners, as
well as established selection criteria such as price/overall cost, departmental priorities, test types,
delivery needs/availability, longer shelf life, test familiarity, and test performance.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has been a leader in funding, procuring, and distributing rapid tests
through multiple channels across Canada, and has been providing rapid tests to provinces and
territories since October 2020. In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of
Canada has ordered over 811 million rapid tests, at a total cost of $5B. Of this total, the federal
government has shipped 687 million rapid tests to provinces and territories (PTs). These rapid tests
have supported the broader testing strategies that PTs have implemented including for screening in
hospitals and other health care settings, as well as for expanded school-based testing, workplace
screening, and community and general population testing.
As a result of federal action in procurement and distribution of rapid tests, in working with PTs,
Canada has been well positioned to address potential resurgence. Demand for rapid tests has
since fallen and there is a risk that remaining tests will go unused prior to their expiration in 2024.
The Government of Canada has made surplus tests available via Public Services and Procurement
Canada’s GCSurplus platform through GCTransfer, allowing federal organizations to access rapid
tests for their employee testing programs, through GCDonate providing access to charities, non-
profits and public institutions to access rapid tests for their staff and the communities they serve,
and internationally.
RECALLS (GENERAL)
ISSUE
News outlets regularly feature product recalls in Canada, including for products regulated by
Health Canada.
KEY FACTS
Health Canada is responsible for regulating the safety and quality of health and consumer products
in Canada. Persons manufacturing, importing, advertising or selling health or consumer products in
Canada must ensure that their products comply with federal laws and regulations.
Recalls are a key tool used to address issues with products that present risks to the health and
safety of consumers. A recall is a corrective action taken by government or industry to address
consumer health or safety issues associated with a product, and may include removing a product
from distribution.
Product recalls are most often initiated by industry to take corrective measures to address health
and safety risks. Health Canada monitors recalls and may take enforcement action if industry does
not comply with applicable legislation, including by issuing mandatory recalls for some products.
Health Canada takes steps to advise the public when products are recalled, for example through
the Recalls and Safety Alerts website which provides easy access to a comprehensive list of recalls,
advisories, and safety alerts for health and consumer products.
KEY MESSAGES
This government’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
Health and consumer products sold in Canada must comply with federal laws and regulations. If a
risk is identified, we expect industry to address issues swiftly, including through product recalls
when appropriate.
Health Canada closely monitors the marketplace and will not hesitate to take action to help protect
Canadians from unsafe products.
The department’s priority is to ensure that people in Canada have the information they need to
make informed decisions about their health. Health Canada regularly publishes recalls, advisories,
and safety alerts to keep Canadian safe.
IF PRESSED ON DRUG, MEDICAL DEVICE OR NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCT RECALLS
Health Canada may become aware of potential health product issues through company
notifications, consumer or industry complaints, or through its own proactive compliance
monitoring activities.
Depending on the issue, a recall may be necessary. If a regulated party fails to effectively recall a
health product, Health Canada will not hesitate to take further enforcement action to protect
Canadians and keep them informed.
Should the department have reason to believe that a health product presents a serious or imminent
risk to health, it also has the power to order a recall if a company does not take action in a timely
manner.
IF PRESSED ON CONSUMER PRODUCT RECALLS
Regulated parties carry out recalls to remove consumer products from the Canadian market that
may pose a risk, as well as to minimize the risk to consumers by advising the public of what to do if
they have a product that has been recalled.
Health Canada may order a recall of a consumer product if it believes that the product is a danger
to human health or safety.
The department takes steps to ensure consumers are made aware of recalls and the actions they
should take through postings on its website and social media.
BACKGROUND / CONTEXTE
Health Canada is responsible for regulating the safety and quality of health and consumer products
in Canada. This includes informing and protecting Canadians from health and safety risks
associated with these products after they are made available to consumers. Persons
manufacturing, importing, advertising or selling health or consumer products in Canada must
ensure that their products comply with federal laws and regulations.
News outlets regularly feature articles about product recalls posted on the Recalls and safety alerts
website. A recall is meant to address an issue that presents significant risk to the health and safety
of consumers.
Industry may carry out all recalls in a voluntary manner when they become aware of potential
health and safety risks of a product. This voluntary approach helps industry to provide the people in
Canada with quick and reliable information on how they can help protect themselves from
dangerous products. Health Canada monitors recalls to ensure they effectively manage the
identified risk. Some federal legislation also provides the Minister of Health the power to order a
mandatory recall if they believe a drug, medical device, natural health product or consumer
product presents a serious or imminent risk to the health and safety of consumers.
In 2014, the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law) amended the Food and
Drugs Act (FDA) to improve the safety and oversight of therapeutic products (i.e., drugs and medical
devices) by introducing measures to, among other things, enable the Minister to order a person who
sells a drug or medical device to recall the product when the Minister believes there is a serious or
imminent risk of injury to health. While a manufacturer or importer is expected to voluntarily initiate
a recall if their product is found to pose a risk to health, a mandatory recall order can be used by the
department to remove a non-compliant product from the market. In 2023, the Government
amended the FDA’s definition of therapeutic products to extend these authorities under Vanessa’s
Law to natural health products, including the power to order recalls.
Additionally, the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act authorizes the Minister of Health to order a
recall of a consumer product if they believe, on reasonable grounds, that the product is a danger to
human health or safety. A recall order would be addressed to a person who manufactures, imports,
or sells a product for commercial purposes. The Minister of Health may also order a person to take
certain measures, including stopping the manufacturing or sale of a consumer product, or any
other measure to address or prevent a danger to human health or safety. If a person does not
comply with a recall order or an order to take corrective measures within the time specified, Health
Canada may issue administrative monetary penalties carrying fines of up to $25,000 a day and can
also carry out the recall or the corrective measure at the person's expense.
SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT
ISSUE
The pandemic disproportionately affected Canadians living in long-term care homes. Canadians
are concerned about the availability of safe, high-quality long-term care services.
KEY FACTS
On January 31, 2023, the Standards Council of Canada, Health Standards Organization (HSO) and
Canadian Standards Association (CSA Group) announced the completion and public release of
new national long-term care standards.
Budget 2023 announced close to $200 billion over 10 years to support the Working Together to
Improve Health Care for Canadians Plan.
Funding includes $7.8 billion over five years that has yet to flow to provinces and territories for
mental health and substance use, home and community care, and long-term care.
As a part of the previous Minister of Health’s Mandate Letter, Health Canada was tasked with
creating a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve.
The Government of Canada has carried out extensive consultations and engagement with
stakeholders and Canadians on a Safe Long-Term Care Act, with the objective of developing this
new legislation.
Budget 2024 announced that the government will introduce a Safe Long-Term Care Act.
KEY MESSAGES
Every senior in Canada deserves to live in dignity, safety, and comfort, regardless of where they live.
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted long-standing and systemic challenges in long-term care
homes across Canada.
Long-term care residents deserve to live in dignity, comfort and respect. That is why the Minister of
Health and the Minister of Seniors were mandated to develop national long-term care standards
and a Safe Long-Term Care Act.
In January 2023, the Standards Council of Canada (SCC), Health Standards Organization (HSO) and
the Canadian Standards Association (CSA) Group released 2 new complementary, independent
long-term care standards. These standards provide guidance for delivering long-term care services
that are safe, reliable and centred on residents' needs.
In the summer and fall of 2023, the Government of Canada has carried out extensive consultations
and engagement on the new Safe Long-Term Care Act. This included consulting with experts,
stakeholders, persons with lived experience, and provinces & territories, as well as building on
existing collaborations with First Nations and Inuit partners.
Budget 2024 announced that the government will introduce a Safe Long-Term Care Act that will
encourage provinces and territories to adopt best practices in the facilities under their
management.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN THE SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT WILL BE TABLED
The Government of Canada is committed to doing more to support seniors across the country. We
know Canadians want to age closer to home and family, but also expect long-term care to be safe
when needed.
As such, our government is developing a Safe Long-Term Care Act to help ensure that all Canadians
get the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
The Government of Canada has carried out extensive consultations and engagement on a Safe
Long-Term Care Act. This includes consulting with experts, stakeholders, persons with lived
experience, and provinces and territories, as well as building on existing collaborations with First
Nations and Inuit partners.
The Government of Canada has also recently completed a public online consultation on Safe Long-
Term care, which will inform the development of the Act.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THE NATIONAL LONG-TERM CARE STANDARDS WILL BE ENFORCED
THROUGH THE NEW SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT
It is important to note that the delivery of long-term care services is a provincial and territorial
responsibility.
Federal legislation will need to be respectful of this provincial-territorial jurisdiction. That is, it will
not mandate standards or regulate long-term care delivery.
The Government of Canada has already been collaborating with provinces and territories to support
improvements in long-term care, as highlighted by the $3 billion investment to support their efforts
to ensure standards for long-term care applied and permanent changes are made.
The Aging with Dignity bilateral agreements will provide $5.4 billion to improve access to home
care, community care or care in a safe long-term care facility for seniors today and tomorrow. So
far, nine provinces and territories have announced agreements with the federal government. It is
anticipated that agreements with the remaining provinces will be announced shortly.
Funding agreements allow us to continue to work together to prioritize the uptake and adherence to
the standards in order to provide high quality care to all Canadians that require it.
BACKGROUND
Long-term Care (LTC) in Canada
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health
care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of LTC falls
within provincial and territorial (PT) jurisdiction.
LTC is referenced in the Canada Health Act (CHA) as “extended health care services.” Extended
services are not covered by the five criteria of the Act or its extra billing and user charges provisions,
and therefore are not subject to the Act’s penalty provisions.
While not mandatory, every PT has LTC legislation, regulations, policies and/or standards, but
variations and gaps exist in oversight, infection prevention and control, quality of care and
workforce.
Mandate Letters
Previous Minister of Health Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports. Specific
commitments include:
Support efforts to improve the quality and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This
includes working with provinces and territories to improve infection prevention and control
measures, identify shared principles, and develop national standards and a Safe Long-Term Care
Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve.
Train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
Third-party standards development process and Safe Long-Term Care Act
On January 31, 2023, the Government of Canada welcomed the release of complementary,
independent LTC standards from the Health Standards Organization (HSO) and Canadian
Standards Association (CSA Group) and thanked them for their dedicated work to complete the
development of LTC standards. The national standards development process was complementary
to, but independent from, the Government of Canada’s collaborative work with PTs to help support
improvements in LTC. While Health Canada did not fund the recently released LTC standards, it did
provide funding to CSA Group and HSO to support enhanced engagement and consultations with
Canadians and stakeholders to ensure the diverse perspectives were considered during the
development of both standards.
The Government of Canada is also developing a new Safe Long-Term Care Act to help ensure
seniors get the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and territorial jurisdiction. The
Government of Canada has carried out extensive consultations and engagement with stakeholders
and Canadians on a Safe Long-Term Care Act.
A 60-day online consultation (July 21 to September 21, 2023) invited Canadians to share their
perspectives and expertise on how to improve the quality and safety of LTC, foster the
implementation of the LTC standards, address human resources challenges, and strengthen
accountability in the LTC sector.
Recognizing traditional jurisdictional responsibilities over the delivery of LTC, the Government of
Canada is also working with provincial and territorial governments on the Safe LTC Act and how to
best support the delivery of quality and safe LTC services. The consultations also included
discussions and roundtables with experts, stakeholders, Indigenous partners and Canadians to
obtain advice on how federal legislation can help support improvements in the quality and safety of
LTC.
ACCESS TO SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE INFORMATION AND SERVICES
ISSUE
There are key barriers and challenges related to access to sexual and reproductive health (SRH)
information and services, including abortion, in Canada. Accurate SRH information and culturally
safe and relevant SRH services, particularly for marginalized populations, is lacking across Canada.
KEY FACTS
People who are 2SLGBTQI+, Indigenous, racialized, living with disabilities (including chronic
conditions), newcomers, or women and youth from underserved communities face the highest
sexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest barriers to accessing support, information,
and services. Often, they do not receive quality care.
KEY MESSAGES
All Canadians should have access to sexual and reproductive health resources and services, no
matter where they live.
Health Canada’s Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund was created in 2021 to advance mandate
commitments. Through Budget 2021 and 2023, $81 million has been committed to the fund over six
years.
The fund supports community-based organizations that help make access to abortion, gender
affirming, and other sexual and reproductive health care information and services more accessible
for underserved populations.
IF PRESSED FOR AN UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
Since 2021, the Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund (SRHF) has committed $36.1M to community
organizations to help make access to abortion, gender affirming care, and other sexual and
reproductive health care information and services more accessible for underserved populations.
An additional $16.7M has been provided to Quebec.
Budget 2023 renewed the SRHF until 2026-27.
The SRHF has funded 21 community organizations..
The Medical Expense Tax Credit has been expanded to include more costs related to use of
reproductive technologies, making conception more affordable.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO CARE FOR TRANS AND NON-BINARY ADOLESCENTS
Health Canada is aware of the government of Alberta’s proposed policies that would reduce access
to gender affirming care for youth.
Our government believes decisions regarding gender-affirming care should be made using
evidence-based information.
Our government believes that transgender youth and their families should be supported to make
informed decisions about the different social and/or medical interventions they may wish to
explore.
The Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund has supported three community organizations that
address trans communities access to care with an investment of approximately $7,4 million.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER ALBERTA’S DECISION ON TRANS CARE IS AGAINST THE CANADA
HEALTH ACT
The aim of the Canda Health Act is to ensure all residents of provinces and territories have
reasonable access to medically necessary health care services on uniform terms and conditions
and without charges related to the provision of those services.
The Act does not stipulate specific procedures to be covered by provincial and territorial plans.
Rather, provincial and territorial health ministries determine medical necessity, in conjunction with
the medical profession.
Any procedures that are deemed medically necessary by a province or territory must be delivered in
a manner that meets that requirements of the Act.
IF PRESSED ON MISINFORMATION AND DISINFORMATION REGARDING THE CARE OF TRANS AND
NON-BINARY CHILDREN AND YOUTH
This government believes that trans and non-binary young people, and their families, should have
access to gender affirming, evidence based, and high-quality health care.
Gender identity is an inherent characteristic that cannot be changed.
This government is protecting trans and non-binary young people through strategic funding, as well
as through outlawing conversion therapy. The government is monitoring with concern the rise of
both misinformation and disinformation regarding trans and non-binary young people, and impacts
on support and public policy regarding trans and non-binary children, adolescents and adults.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS ABOUT DESISTANCE OR TRANSITION REGRET
While stories of “desistance” or “transition regret” can receive significant media attention and are
used as part of misinformation and disinformation campaigns, in fact it is rare that youth stop their
gender transition and return to living as their gender assigned at birth. Evidence shows that a
number of young people who do stop their transition report it was because they did not have
enough support or were experiencing discrimination due to being trans; some of these youth go on
to transition later in life.
IF PRESSED ON ABORTION SERVICES – GENERAL
This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that no
one should be forced to carry an unwanted or unsafe pregnancy.
Of the $81 million committed in Budget 2021 and Budget 2023, approximately $11.4 million to date
has been invested in three projects focused on access to abortion. Through these projects, new
resources and supports are being developed for health care professionals, access to accurate
information about abortion is being improved, and financial and logistical support for travel for
abortion care is being provided.
IF PRESSED ON ABORTION SERVICES – COMPLIANCE UNDER THE CANADA HEALTH ACT
While abortion services are insured in all provinces and territories there is still work to be done to
improve access in many areas of the country.
Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to implement their action plan,
including the introduction of new regulations, which is expected to eliminate patient charges for
access to abortion services.
The abortion clinic in New Brunswick closed in February 2024, but New Brunswick remains subject
to Canada Health Transfer deductions for patient charges levied through fiscal 2023-24, for refusing
to provide coverage for these services.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THE GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE FUNDING TO ORGANIZATIONS
OFFERING ALTERNATIVES TO ABORTION (I.E. CONTINUING THE PREGNANCY)
This fund is specifically designed to help women access abortion and it will not support initiatives
that discourage or are opposed to freedom of choice or attempt to override the individual’s right to
make decisions about their own body.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGAL STATUS OF MEDICATION ABORTION IN THE UNITED STATES AND THE
AVAILABILITY OF MIFEGYMISO IN CANADA
Health Canada is aware that the U.S. Supreme Court heard oral arguments on how patients can
access Mifepristone on March 26, 2024, with the judgment expected in June.
Mifegymiso, which is not available in the U.S., is the only abortion pill authorized in Canada and
publicly covered by all provinces and territories. It combines Mifespristone and Misoprostol.
Health Canada is closely monitoring the supply of Mifegymiso in Canada. There are currently no
supply issues.
IF PRESSED ON DATA
The Government is also investing $7.6 million over five years for Statistics Canada to collect data
that will fill existing information gaps and help us target appropriate sexual and reproductive health
supports for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON SEX EDUCATION CURRICULA
Health Canada is aware of the government of Saskatchewan’s recent policy change and Alberta’s
proposed policy change regarding sexual education.
Our Government is committed to working towards a country where everyone is free to be
themselves and participate fully in society. This is especially important when homes and
communities are not welcoming spaces for diversity.
The federal government believes that young people should have access to accurate sex education
and that schools should be an inclusive environment where all children can learn about keeping
themselves healthy and safe.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has made strong commitments to gender equality, using a feminist
lens, and realizing and protecting sexual and reproductive health rights.
Key barriers and challenges related to inequitable and variable access to sexual and reproductive
health services remain. Indigenous, racialized and 2SLGBTQI+ populations, as well as women and
youth from underserved populations face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the
greatest barriers to accessing support, information, and services.
Since the establishment of the Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund, Health Canada has
successfully issued two calls for proposals, and is now administering 24 projects. $29M has been
committed to 23 SRH projects across Canada, and a further $9.7M has been committed to Québec
for projects within that province.
Of these projects, seven address 2SLGBTQI+ communities, four address access to abortion, four
focus on Indigenous communities, four address multiple priorities, two focus on racialized people
or newcomers, and two specifically address youth.
Canada’s current national-level data on sexual and reproductive health is limited to a narrow range
of indicators. There is insufficient data available to support understanding and evidence-based
decision-making to address a full range of key indicators of sexual and reproductive health,
including prevalence of sexually transmitted infections, contraception use, pregnancy intention,
and sexual knowledge and behaviours.
SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN CANADA
ISSUE
Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death, killing
approximately 46,000 people in Canada each year. The Government has an ambitious target to
reduce tobacco use to less than five percent by 2035.
KEY FACTS
Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in Canada, killing half of all individuals
who smoke.
In 2020, the total cost of tobacco use to society was approximately $11.2 billion.
According to 2022 data, approximately 3.8 million people smoke cigarettes – about 12% of the
population in Canada over the age of 12.
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated approach to help Canadians quit
tobacco and protect youth and people who do not use tobacco from nicotine addiction, supported
by a $330 million investment over five years, starting in May 2018.
KEY MESSAGES
Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death in Canada.
Our government is committed to reducing tobacco use in Canada to less than five percent by 2035.
Health Canada continues to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and people who do not smoke
from smoking, and to provide people with information on the health hazards of tobacco use, and
supports for quitting smoking.
Canada recently became the first country to require written health warnings be displayed on
individual cigarettes.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR PERSONS WHO SMOKE
Quitting smoking can be difficult. Our Government is committed to providing resources to help.
Our Government launched the Tools for a Smoke-Free Life campaign, which encourages adults
aged 35+ who smoke to learn more about the array of tools and supports that can help them quit
smoking.
People in Canada can also contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists
can help develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their
community, where available. The number and web address for the helpline are displayed on
cigarette packs.
IF PRESSED ON YOUTH VAPING
Protecting the health and safety of youth is a top priority. We are encouraged to see that vaping
rates among youth have levelled off since 2021, however, they remain too high.
We remain concerned about substance use, including youth vaping, and are taking action.
Regulations prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can be seen
or heard by youth, set a maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products, and require
manufacturers and importers to provide sales and ingredients information to Health Canada.
IF PRESSED ON FLAVOURS REGULATIONS
In Canada, vaping among youth remains high. Health Canada has identified the availability of
various desirable flavours as a major contributing factor to the previously-observed rapid rise in
youth vaping.
On May 16, Health Canada’s Forward Regulatory Plan was updated to include submission of the
regulatory package to restrict flavours in vaping products for final publication in Spring 2024.
Based on our experience with reducing youth use of tobacco, we know that comprehensive
measures, such as regulatory action, public education and health promotion, and enhanced
compliance and enforcement activities can impact youth uptake and use.
Health Canada will continue to support individuals seeking to quit smoking through use of use
authorized nicotine replacement therapies and cessation medications. Vaping products will
continue to be available to adults who smoke.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW
The first review of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act found that the Act appears to be making
progress towards achieving its vaping-related objectives.
It also found more work needs to be done and identified areas for action, such as strengthening
compliance and enforcement.
Public consultations on the second review focused on tobacco, and ended on November 17, 2023.
The department is currently analyzing feedback received.
A final report will be tabled in Parliament in 2024 and will be made available online at that time.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO COST RECOVERY
Tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of illness and premature death in Canada.
That is why we proposed in the 2023 Fall Economic Statement to amend the Tobacco and Vaping
Products Act to implement a tobacco cost recovery framework. Amendments proposed in Budget
2024 would enhance the sharing of information about tobacco and vaping products across federal
departments, which will support the cost recovery framework.
This framework will help minimize the cost burden on taxpayers of funding federal tobacco and
vaping activities.
Health Canada will consult broadly on the proposed cost recovery framework before
implementation.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO LABELLING REGULATIONS
The Government of Canada is committed to increasing public awareness of the harms of tobacco
use.
To this end, we refreshed warning messages and extended health warnings to all tobacco product
packages, to maintain their effectiveness.
We also require health warnings on individual tobacco products, so it would be impossible to avoid
health warnings. This is important for youth, who often get their first cigarette from a friend or
sibling, and don’t see the warnings on the pack.
IF PRESSED ON A SMOKE-FREE GENERATION
The Government of Canada is committed to protecting youth from the dangers of tobacco use. We
are pleased to see that smoking rates among Canadian youth are at an all-time low.
We recently consulted Canadians during the second review of the Tobacco and Vaping Products
Act, which focused on tobacco. We received many suggestions, including a smoke free generation
and we are analysing the feedback.
Canada is a global leader on many fronts in tobacco control, such our warnings on packaging. We
engage regularly with international counterparts to learn from each other about new measures
taking place.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address tobacco use. It
is led by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada
Revenue Agency, Indigenous Services Canada, Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs
Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police. The Strategy sets a goal of reducing tobacco use to less than 5% by 2035 (5 by 35).
Data released from the 2022 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) show that smoking rates
continue to decline. Decades of tobacco control have seen positive impacts, resulting in a national
average rate of 12% (3.8M) down from 15% (4.7M) in 2019. While the recent declines are positive,
millions of Canadians are still smoking. Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in
Canada, killing half of all Canadians who smoke. Furthermore, prevalence rates among First
Nations and Inuit are much higher than that of other Canadians. Reaching the 5 by 35 goal will
require continued tobacco control actions both population-wide, and also targeting groups with
higher smoking rates.
In March 2023, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released an update of its
report entitled “Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms”. The report found that in 2020 the total
cost of tobacco use to society was approximately $11.2 billion, or 22.7% of the total cost of
substance use to Canadians. Furthermore, it was responsible for nearly two in three lives lost
(46,366 in 2020).
The previous Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ mandate letter includes a commitment to
require tobacco manufacturers to pay for the cost of federal public health investments in tobacco
control. This is one of a number of comprehensive measures the Government of Canada is taking to
reach 5 by 35.
2024-25 Main Estimates
Health Canada
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
3,919.0
Increases
4,812.5
Decreases
(333.5)
Net Change
4,479.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
8,398.0
% Change This Year over Last Year
114.3%
(in millions $)
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
181.2
Increases
129.5
Decreases
(30.1)
Net Change
99.4
2024-25 Main Estimates
280.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
54.9%
(in millions $)
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
4,100.2
Increases
4,942.0
Decreases
(363.6)
Net Change
4,578.4
2024-25 Main Estimates
8,678.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
111.7%
Health Canada has a proposed net increase of $4,578.4M in its 2024-25 Main Estimates (from
$4,100.2M in 2023-24 to $8,678.6M in 2024-25).
Increases of $4,941.6M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed TB Submissions increase of $4,813.4M
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians ($2,630.5M)
Dental Care for Canadians and the Interim Canada Dental Benefit ($2,095.0M)
Renewal of the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy ($58.3M)
Strengthening Environmental Protection for a Healthier Canada (support amendments to the
Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999) ($10.1M)
Building a world-class health data system for Canadians ($8.5M)
Canada's National Adaptation Strategy ($7.8M)
Action Plan for Official Languages 2023-2028: Protection-Promotion-Collaboration ($3.2M)
Funding Level Increases [$8.4M]
Terry Fox Research Institute and Ovarian Cancer Canada in support of cancer research ($8.4M)
Other [$119.8M
Funding for newly signed collective agreements ($106.1M)
Various other increases under $2.0M (totalling $9.4M)
Transfer from the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food for the delivery of the Minor Use
Pesticide Program under the Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership ($4.3M)
Decreases of $233.9M (including Statutory)
Sunset [$235.0M]
Improve mental health supports and services (Wellness Together Canada) ($69.9M)
Canada’s Chemicals Management Regime ($61.7M)
Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office ($24.5M)
Strengthening the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process ($17.8M)
Bringing Innovation to Regulations ($13.3M)
National Standards on Mental Health ($12.7M)
Address anti-Indigenous racism in health care ($9.6M)
Construction of plasma collection sites ($9.2M)
Implementation of greening initiatives ($8.3M)
Ensure the ongoing integrity of the Public Service Occupational Health Program ($6.8M)
Funding Level Decrease [$90.4M]
Addressing the Opioid Crisis and Substance Use and Addictions Program (as a result of approved
reprofiles) ($64.3M)
Support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services ($13.5M)
Canada Brain Research Fund Program (as a result of an approved reprofile) ($8.2M)
Renewal of the federal framework for the legalization and regulation of Cannabis in Canada ($4.4M)
Other [$38.9M]
Refocusing Government Spending ($20.7M)
Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plans ($13.7M)
Various other decreases under $2.0M ($4.5M)
Statutory Appropriations - Net funding increase of $99.4M relates mainly to the Canada Dental
Benefit Plan and employee benefits plan adjustments.
For information purposes, the 2024-25 Main Estimates total statutory includes the new Canadian
Dental Benefit Plan of $100.2M and a statutory revenue forecast of $51.5M for the internal shared
services partnership between Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada which is in
line with the previous year.
Health Canada’s 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
HC
CONTRIBUTIONS
Substance Use and Addictions Program
Purpose /Objectives
The Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides funding for a wide range of evidence-
informed and innovative substance use prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across
Canada at the community, regional and national levels. These public education, capacity building,
research, best practices/standards and service delivery initiatives target a range of substances,
including opioids, stimulants, cannabis, alcohol, tobacco and vaping products.
Expected Results
Health Canada provides contribution funding through SUAP in support of the Canadian Drug and
Substance Strategy, as well as the delivery of 3 of the Department’s Programs: Tobacco Control,
Controlled Substances, and Cannabis.
In addition to funding many community, regional and national organizations, Health Canada also
provides approximately $10 million SUAP funding annually to the Canadian Centre on Substance
Use and Addiction to achieve national impact through partnerships, and for knowledge
mobilization, capacity building and training for targeted groups/populations in the areas of stigma
reduction, workforce competencies, alcohol, cannabis, and the intersections between substance
use and mental health.
It is expected that through these investments, Canadians and stakeholders will have access to
evidence- based information on substance use and increased availability of harm reduction and
treatment services. In the longer-term, this will lead to improved knowledge and skills and will help
Canadians make informed decisions about their health to reduce risk-taking behavior. These
investments may contribute to reduced negative health impacts experienced by people who use
drugs.
2022–23 Expenditures
145,289,504
2023–24 Main Estimates
136,634,149
2024–25 Main Estimates
104,300,573
Mental Health Commission of Canada Contribution Program
Purpose /Objectives
The Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC), an arm's length, not-for-profit organization,
was established in March 2007 with a 10-year mandate to improve health and social outcomes for
people and their families living with mental illness. Between 2007 and 2017, the Government of
Canada invested $130 million in the MHCC through a grant, to develop a mental health strategy for
Canada, conduct an anti-stigma campaign, and create a knowledge exchange centre. In 2016, the
MHCC's mandate was renewed for a 10-year period, from 2017-18 to 2026-27, to advance work on
mental health priorities in 4 areas: the integration of mental health and substance use (in
collaboration with the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addictions), suicide prevention,
priority populations, and engagement with diverse stakeholders.
Expected Results
The MHCC is expected to contribute to the improved mental health and well-being of Canadians,
notably in the areas of suicide prevention, stigma reduction, population-based initiatives, and
mental health and substance use integration. This will be done through developing and
disseminating knowledge products, establishing collaborative partnerships, and providing
evidence-based trainings.A variety of learning materials (online modules, training, videos, etc.) will
be targeted for children and youth, older adults, Indigenous communities, and underserved and
marginalized populations. In addition, the MHCC will further support the implementation of the
National Standard for Psychological Health and Safety in the Workplace and the National Standard
for Mental Health and Well-Being of Post-Secondary Students.
2022–23 Expenditures
14,250,000
2023–24 Main Estimates
14,250,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
14,250,000
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENTS
Contributions to Provinces and Territories for Shared Health Priorities
Purpose /Objectives
Through new investments outlined in Budget 2023 associated with the Working Together to Improve
Health Care for Canadians Plan, this Program was expanded to support provinces and territories in
addressing the following shared health priorities:
Expanding access to family health services, including in rural and remote areas.
Supporting health workers and reducing backlogs for health services such as surgeries and
diagnostics.
Improving access to quality mental health, substance use, and addictions services.
Modernizing the health care system with standardized information and digital tools so health care
providers and patients have access to electronic health information.
Helping Canadians age with dignity, closer to home, by supporting efforts to improve access to
home and community care, and safe long-term care.
The Plan includes $25 billion over 10 years (2023-24 to 2032-33) in bilateral funding to support the
first 4 shared health priorities, which will be transferred to provinces and territories through the
Working Together agreements. These agreements also include the remaining $2.4 billion of $5
billion from Budget 2017 to improve access to mental health and addictions services by supporting
one or more of the areas of action outlined in the August 2017 Common Statement of Principles on
Shared Health Priorities.
Health Canada will also provide provinces and territories with $3 billion over 5 years through Aging
with Dignity agreements to support them in helping Canadians age with dignity close to home.
Provinces and territories will:
Apply standards of care in long-term care facilities.
Help support workforce stability, including wage top-ups and improvements to workplace
conditions.
The Aging with Dignity agreements also include the remaining $2.4 billion from the Budget 2017
commitment of $6 billion over 10 years to advance the priorities associated with home and
community care in the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
Expected Results
It is expected that through these investments, Canadians will experience tangible improvements in
access to high-quality family health services (i.e., family doctor, or nurse practitioner); timely,
equitable, and high-quality mental health and substance use services, with a focus on youth;
interoperable digital tools and data; home and community care, and palliative care services.
Canadians will also receive improved long-term care by ensuring consistent standards are applied,
strengthening enforcement and oversight, and supporting initiatives to enhance workforce stability.
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
-
2024–25 Main Estimates
4,300,310,000
Health Canada’s 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians
Description
Funding to Support the four shared health priorities: Renew the Territorial Health Investment Fund
in recognition of medical travel and the additional cost of delivering health care in the territories;
support work with provinces and territories to develop new health data indicators; and, advance
digital health tools and an interoperability roadmap. (+$2,630.5M)
$2,630.5M received in-year (SEA) in 2023-24
Mental Health is contained in two of the four pillars of this item
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
2,630.5
Net Change (in millions)
2,630.5
Renewal of the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy
Description
Funding to improve access to community-based substance use services and supports; amend
legislation and create new regulations to streamline approvals for harm reduction services; support
data collection and analysis; and target enforcement efforts to disrupt the toxic illegal drug supply.
(+$58.3M)
$31.7M received in-year (SEB) in 2023-24
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
58.3
Net Change (in millions)
58.3
Sunset - Decreases
Improve mental health supports and services (Wellness Together Canada)
Description
Funding in 2023-24 to sustain improved access to mental health services with the Wellness
Together Canada portal, as well as to help Canadians who are experiencing mental health or
substance use issues.
This item sunsets in 2023-24 and has not been renewed for 2024-25
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
69.9
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
Net Change (in millions)
(69.9)
National Standards on Mental Health
Description
Funding of $12.7M was reprofiled from 2021-22 to 2023-24 so that contractual work being done by
the Standards Council of Canada can continue in 2023-24. Initial standards deliverables will be
complete in March 2023 in order to proceed to the next phase of testing.
This item sunsets in 2023-24 and has not been renewed for 2024-25
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
12.7
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
Net Change (in millions)
(12.7)
Funding Level Decreases
Addressing the Opioid Crisis and Substance Use and Addictions Program (as a result of approved
reprofiles)
Description
Overall net funding level decrease due to the following:
Sunset for Budget 2021 Addressing the opioids crisis and problematic substance use (-$32.2M)
Sunset for Budget 2019 The Drug Overdose Crisis in Canada (-$17.0M)
Sunset for the 2020 FES Addressing the opioids crisis (-$8.3M)
Decrease for Budget 2022 Addressing the opioids crisis and problematic substance use (-$6.4M)
Decrease for the Substance Use and Addictions Program reprofile (-$0.3M)
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
105.7
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
41.4
Net Change (in millions)
(64.3)
2024-25 Main Estimates
Public Health Agency of Canada
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
4,157.7
Increases
655.5
Decreases
-3,013.1
Net Change
-2,357.6
2024-25 Main Estimates
1,800.1
% Change
(57%)
(in millions $)
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
59.1
Increases
33.9
Decreases
-24.6
Net Change
9.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
68.4
% Change
16%
(in millions $)
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
4,216.8
Increases
689.4
Decreases
-3,037.7
Net Change
-2,348.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
1,868.5
% Change
Note: Figures may not add up due to rounding.
Public Health Agency of Canada has a proposed total net decrease of $2,348.3M in its 2024-25
Main Estimates (from $4,216.8M in 2023-24 to $1,868.5M in 2024-25).
Increase of $655.5M (excluding Statutory)
Minister Holland, Health
Funding for biomanufacturing capacity and pandemic readiness ($364.3M);
Funding to support an agile, resilient, and adaptive workforce ($188.2M);
Funding for compensation adjustments ($28.0M);
Funding for infrastructure investments for Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care ($11.6M); and
Funding items below $4M ($3.4M).
Minister Saks, Mental Health and Addictions
Funding to support Canada’s three-digit suicide prevention and emotional distress line ($50.3M);
and
Funding to support a renewed Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy ($4.7M).
Minister Qualtrough, Sport and Physical Activity
Funding to renew ParticipACTION’s Let’s Get Moving Initiative ($5.0M)
Decrease of $3,013.1M (excluding Statutory)
Minister Holland, Health
Funding for vaccines and vaccine deployment (-$2,315.1M);
Funding for the mpox Imvamune vaccine (-$309.2M);
Funding for warehousing of personal protective equipment (-$106.6M);
Funding for the Sero-Surveillance consortium (-$65.5M);
Funding for the influenza & pneumococcal vaccine (-$53.7M);
Funding for medical countermeasures (-$17.0M);
Funding for the National Dementia Strategy (-$13.3M);
Funding for Refocusing Government Spending to Deliver for Canadians (-$12.7M);
Funding for the Pan-Canadian Vaccine Injury Support Program (-$10.0M);
Funding for innovative research and procurement of testing technologies related to the pandemic (-
$9.9M);
Funding to strengthen Canada’s ability to detect and respond to public health events and
emergencies through data and risk assessment (-$5.7M);
Funding for immigration, settlement measures, temporary accommodations and income support
for Ukrainians (-$5.1M); and
Funding items above -$4M (-$10.8M).
Minister Saks, Mental Health and Addictions
Funding for mental health of those most affected by COVID-19 (-$76.9M); and
Funding for strengthening multiculturalism and addressing the challenges faced by black
Canadians (-$1.6M).
Statutory – overall net increase of $9.3M in statutory funding for the employee benefit plan.
Public Health Agency of Canada’s 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
New and Renewed Funding - Increases
Initiative
Funding for biomanufacturing capacity and pandemic readiness- Minister Holland, Health
Description
The Government of Canada is working to strengthen Canada’s domestic biomanufacturing
capacity, create jobs, facilitate and support leading-edge research and development and protect
the health of Canadians by ensuring we have access to a more secure and technologically
diversified vaccine supply.
This initiative will address gaps in Canada’s domestic vaccine production capabilities, provide
timely access to pandemic vaccines, and establish production capacity across a range of vaccine
technology platforms.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
364.3
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
364.3
Initiative
Funding for PHAC Renewal - Minister Holland, Health
Description
Budget 2023 announced funding of $639.5 million over 4 years, so that PHAC could stabilize
workforce capacity and address priority actions and gaps across four interlinked areas:
Emergency Preparedness: Building on Lessons Learned;
Infectious Disease and Science: Progressing Towards Innovation;
Supporting a Public Health and Equity Lens in Policies: Aligning with the Data-driven Equity and
Prevention Agenda; and
Anti-Microbial Resistance: Addressing a silent pandemic.
These investments will help to lay the groundwork to establish an agile, resilient and adaptative
federal public health agency as a first step in its institutional renewal agenda.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
188.2
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
188.2
Initiative
Funding for 9-8-8 suicide prevention- Minister Saks, Mental Health and Addictions
Description
Budget 2023 announced funding of $158.4M over three years (of which $15M is existing funding) to
support the operations of the 9-8-8 line for suicide prevention and emotional distress which would
provide Canadians with safe, high quality, equitable, accessible and evidence-based crisis support,
24/7/365, through call or text, in English and French.
PHAC will administer 9-8-8 funding through a contribution agreement with Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, which will build capacity by supporting the onboarding of new independent crisis
lines to the 9-8-8 responder network.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
50.3
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
50.3
Initiative
Funding for compensation adjustments- Minister Holland, Health
Description
This funding is for compensation adjustments associated with collective agreements concluded
between September 13, 2022 and March 31, 2023.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
28.0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
28.0
Initiative
Funding for the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care (IELCC) initiative- Minister Holland,
Health
Description
Funding will;
Ensure that more Indigenous families have access to high-quality and culturally relevant programs
and services;
Support repairs and renovations at existing IELCC centres and create an IELCC Major Infrastructure
Fund to renovate or replace existing Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern Communities
(AHSUNC) sites and to support new construction and expansion of sites;
Give authority for a 3% funding escalator to be applied to all new and existing Indigenous Early
Learning and Child Care grants and contributions funding sought in this submission starting in
2027-2028, as well as for legacy funding amounts for the AHSUNC program.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
30.5
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
42.1
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
11.6
Initiative
Funding for ParticipACTION- Minister Qualtrough, Sport and Physical Activity
Description
ParticipACTION Let’s Get Moving initiative originally received $25M over five years (2018-19 to 2022-
23) through Budget 2018. With that funding having sunset, the renewed investment of $10M over
two years, would continue to implement its national public education campaign and create various
tools and programs to increase participation in physical activity among all Canadians, including
population groups facing health inequalities.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
5.0
Initiative
Funding for Canadian Drugs & Substances Strategy - Minister Saks, Mental Health and Addictions
Description
Budget 2023 announced funding of a total of $359.2M over 5 years for the Canadian Drugs and
Substances Strategy.
The new Youth Substance Use Prevention Program will fund communities to build their capacity to
implement data-driven approaches for the prevention of substance-related harms among youth.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
4.7
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
4.7
Initiative
Various other increases under $4M - Minister Holland, Health
Description
Various initiatives with funding level increases under $4M.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
3.4
Decreases
Initiative
Funding for the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines, logistics and primary packaging- Minister
Holland, Health
Description
Funding to support the continued contractual commitments related to COVID-19 vaccine doses
that were unavailable or unneeded in previous years and were therefore shifted into future years.
It will also allow Canada the necessary flexibility and agility to rapidly secure additional doses of
new formulation, if needed, to provide Canadians with vaccines that provide the best protection
against COVID-19 and the cover to secure additional doses into 2024
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
2,469.1
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
154.0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(2,315.1)
Initiative
Funding for the mpox Imvamune Vaccine - Minister Holland, Health
Description
Funding to support the procurement of additional Imvamune vaccines for mpox and smallpox as
well as to support its storage and distribution.
This funding was to help ensure that Canada has a mpox vaccine supply contract in place sufficient
to offer two-doses of the vaccine to priority populations, and the equipment/infrastructure to meet
Imvamune vaccine storage and distribution requirements.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
309.2
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(309.2)
Initiative
Funding for personal protective equipment, logistics and warehousing- Minister Holland, Health
Description
Funding to provide warehousing and logistics support to rapidly deliver critical PPE and medical
supplies to provinces, territories and Indigenous communities, as well as to maintain the readiness
of the NESS.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
173.0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
66.4
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(106.6)
Initiative
Funding to improve mental health supports and services to help those most affected by COVID-19
and distress centres- Minister Saks, Mental Health and Addictions
Description
Budget 2021 announced funding to address the mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This funding includes $100 million over three years for mental health promotion and mental illness
prevention for those most affected, and $50 million over two years to address PTSD and trauma in
frontline and essential workers and others who are disproportionately affected.
It also includes $3 million over two years to develop indicators to monitor the impact of national
mental health service standards and set up data collection and data infrastructure for standards
reporting.
Part of the funding is also to help to stabilize distress centres during the pandemic and pandemic
recovery phase as they continue to experience a surge in demand for mental health crisis calls.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
81.9
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(76.9)
Initiative
Funding for the Sero-Surveillance Consortium - Minister Holland, Health
Description
Funding has sunsetted.
Funding supported the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force’s (CITF) mandate to mobilize a series of
serological and vaccine surveillance studies to determine the extent of SARS-CoV-2 infection and
immune response in the Canadian population
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
65.5
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(65.5)
Initiative
Funding for the procurement of domestic influenza vaccines- Minister Holland, Health
Description
To support a sustained state of vaccine readiness, the Government of Canada maintains contracts
to secure pandemic vaccine production capacity and priority access for Canada in the event of an
influenza pandemic.
This funding would support a contract with a domestic vaccine manufacturer to ensure Canada
remains protected against the threat of an influenza pandemic over the next five years (starting in
2022-23).
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
127.7
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
74.0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(53.7)
Initiative
National Microbiology Laboratory (Medical Countermeasures)- Minister Holland, Health
Description
Funding for the National Microbiology Laboratory Facility has been reduced by $19M ongoing as per
a recent Department of Finance decision.
Decision stems from not all operational funding is needed until the new pre-clinical medical
countermeasures facility is built.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
51.4
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
32.4
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(17.0)
Initiative
Funding for a National Dementia Strategy- Minister Holland, Health
Description
As part of Budget 2019, the Government of Canada announced $50 million over 5 years to support
the implementation of key elements of A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire, which
was released in June 2019. The strategy has three national objectives focused on prevention,
advancing therapies, and finding a cure, and improving the quality of life of people living with
dementia and caregivers.
Funding has sunsetted.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
13.3
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(13.3)
Initiative
Funding for the B2023 Reductions- Minister Holland, Health
Description
Budget 2023 proposed to reduce spending on consulting, other professional services, and travel by
roughly 15% of planned 2023-24 discretionary spending in these areas.
Additionally, the budget proposed to phase in a roughly 3% reduction of eligible spending by
departments and agencies by 2026-27.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
(12.7)
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(12.7)
Initiative
Funding for the Vaccine Injury Support Program - Minister Holland, Health
Description
This funding is to help establish and maintain the Pan-Canadian Vaccine Injury Support Program
that will ensure fair and timely access to financial support for all people in Canada in the event that
they experience a serious and permanent injury as a result of receiving a Health Canada authorized
vaccine administered in Canada.
Budget 2024 just announced another $36M over two years.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
19.0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
9.0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(10.0)
Initiative
Funding for Innovative Technology - Minister Holland, Health
Description
Funding has sunsetted.
Funding supported the implementation of innovative approaches to address COVID-19.
Allowed the National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) to expand existing COVID-19 programming for
wastewater surveillance and genomic sequencing, as well as in replacing the NML’s aging mobile
laboratory.
This funding ensures that public health partners and Canadians alike continue to receive the
services and intelligence that these initiatives provide.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
9.9
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(9.9)
Initiative
Funding for Detect, Understand and Act - Minister Holland, Health
Description
This funding is for strengthening Canada’s ability to detect and respond to public health events and
emergencies through data and risk assessment. It will help to stabilize and strengthen key public
health monitoring, reporting and risk assessment capacities in response to COVID-19.
The pandemic response demonstrated that there is a need to close gaps in accessing public health
data as well as build infrastructure to better monitor the health of Canadians and the response to
future public health threats.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
147.8
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
142.1
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(5.7)
Initiative
Funding for immigration, settlement measures, temporary accommodations, and income support
for Ukrainians - Minister Holland, Health
Description
Funding has sunsetted.
This funding was to support and conduct health screening and assessments of international
travelers at its ports of entry pursuant to the Quarantine Act for both incoming Ukraine nationals
and other immigration populations.
This funding supported officials to be stationed at various locations at all times of the day for both
physical and virtual health assessments.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.1
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(5.1)
Initiative
Funding for Strengthening Multiculturalism and Addressing the Challenges Faced by Black
Canadians- Minister Saks, Mental Health and Addictions
Description
The COVID-19 pandemic has had serious impacts on the mental health of Canadians. Some
populations have been disproportionately affected, including youth, seniors, Black and other
racialized populations, health care workers and essential service providers, and others.
Budget 2021 provided time limited funding to PHAC for grant and contribution programming to
promote mental health and prevent mental illness, and address posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and trauma, in priority populations. This funding has sunsetted.
Budget 2024 just announce $4M over 2 years to continue this initiative.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
1.6
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(1.6)
Initiative
Various other decreases above -$4.0M- Minister Holland, Health
Description
Various initiatives with funding level decreases under $4M.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions) *excluding statutory
(10.8)
Health Portfolio’s 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
Public Health Agency of Canada - 2024-25 Main Estimates
Summary of Transfer Payment Program Variances
PHAC
Grants
Grants to individuals and organizations in support of health promotion projects in the areas of
building community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and
partnership building/intersectoral collaboration
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial assistance provided through grants that support the
Public Health Agency of Canada's (PHAC) interest in promoting population health and disease and
injury prevention.
The goal of Promotion of Population Health Grants is to increase the capacity of individuals and
communities to maintain and improve their health.
The key programs in this class are:
PHAC Renewal ($7M)
DUA ($4M)
Family Violence ($1.4M)
Explanation of Variance
($22M) in funding for distress centres has also sunset in 23-24 - Minister Saks, Mental Health and
Addictions
The purpose of this funding was to support the ongoing surge in demand faced by distress centres,
at the same time that the sector is experiencing challenges in recruiting and retaining responders.
The Distress Centres support the needs of those experiencing mental health crisis and distress.
($11M) in funding for Mental Health of Those Affected by COVID-19 has sunset in 23-24 - Minister
Saks, Mental Health and Addictions
This funding was to support enhanced programming to address the mental health needs of
populations most affected by the pandemic, including youth, older adults, First Nations, Inuit,
Métis, Black and other racialized populations, health care workers and essential service providers.
$7M in PHAC Renewal funding to be received in 2024-25 - Minister Holland, Health
This funding is to help stabilize core program activities as outlined through the PHAC Renewal
Phase I (stabilization) to meet the mandates of protection, prevention and promotion for the most
pressing public health needs and priorities.
2022-23 Expenditures
22,234,028
2023-24 Main Estimates
62,475,520
2024-25 Main Estimates
35,154,954
Main Estimates Variance
(27,320,566)
Grants to individuals and organizations in support of public health infrastructure
G&C class correction for DUA – from immunization surveillance to public health infrastructure
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial support and assistance provided through grants that
support the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) interests in public health.
The purpose of the Public Health Grants Program is to strengthen public health infrastructure within
Canada.
The key programs in this class are:
DUA ($10M)
CARB-X ($3M)
Explanation of Variance
($52M) in funding for Sero-surveillance has sunset in 23-24 - Minister Holland, Health
This reprofiled funding supported the close-out of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force (CITF) and
transitioning of core elements of the CITF to PHAC.
($4.2M) in funding for NML Innovative Technology has also sunset in 23-24- Minister Holland,
Health
This funding reprofile was specifically for the expansion of wastewater surveillance programming
and genomics surveillance as well as the replacement of the aging mobile laboratory would benefit
from increased investment.
Funding for DUA has decreased by ($3M) in 24-25 - Minister Holland, Health
The DUA funding is for the Agency’s ability to access the right data at the right time through disease
monitoring (Detect), through capacity and infrastructure interpret intelligence and assess the risks
to the health of Canadians (Understand), and undertake appropriate actions in a timely manner
(Act).
A Vote transfer from O&M to G&Cs for $3M for 24-25 came in as a 23-24 approved Banking Day item
for CARB-X- Minister Holland, Health
CARB-X is a non-profit organization and a global leader in pooling funds to support the world’s
largest and most innovative pipeline of preclinical and early-stage development products against
antibiotic resistant infections. The conversion in funding is to reimburse the International Health
Grants Program for funding a CARB-X project.
Correction to the Grant Class for $5.3M in 24-25 as related to the DUA TB sub
2022-23 Expenditures
9,263,877
2023-24 Main Estimates
63,588,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
13,457,193
Main Estimates Variance
(50,130,807)
Grants to eligible non-profit international organizations in support of their projects or programs on
health
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial support and assistance provided through grants that
support the Health Portfolio’s interest in achieving a high quality, sustainable and accountable
health system through support to international organizations and/or health initiatives whose
mandates are consistent with the Health Portfolio’s health policy objectives and priorities or which
complement Canada’s health research agenda.
The International Health Grants Program (IHGP) facilitates the Health Portfolio’s participation in
international activities which have goals and objectives that are essential, and complementary to
national initiatives.
The key programs in this class are:
Borrowed $1M grant ceiling from Health Promotion grants
International programs ($1.2M)
Explanation of Variance
An external transfer was received from Health Canada in 23-24 for ($0.17M) for Chemical
Management and Climate Change initiatives - Minister Holland, Health
The money transferred to the IHGP will be used to leverage international expertise and support the
work of international partners in the areas of chemicals management, capacity building and
climate
change adaptation.
2022-23 Expenditures
3,006,816
2023-24 Main Estimates
2,347,119
2024-25 Main Estimates
2,180,000
Main Estimates Variance
(167,119)
Diabetes Prevention Challenge
Purpose of the Class
The Impact Canada Initiative Terms and Conditions support departments in their prizes,
challenges, and outcomes-based programming approaches, such as the Type 2 Diabetes
Prevention Challenge.
The objective of the Impact Canada Initiative is to support the Government of Canada in adopting a
horizontal grants and contributions programming approach to better solve public policy challenges
and improve results for Canadians.
The key programs in this class are:
Diabetes Challenge Prize ($3M)
Diabetes National Framework ($1.3M)
Explanation of Variance
$1.0M more in reprofiled funding for the Diabetes Challenge Prize in 24-25- Minister Holland,
Health
TB funding profile for the development of a Diabetes National Framework has also decreased by
($1.7M) in 24-25 Minister Holland, Health
The Diabetes Challenge Prize focuses on surfacing different approaches to diabetes and promote
the development of solutions to reduce the risks associated with type 2 diabetes, whereas the
Framework is designed to support improved access for Canadians to diabetes prevention and
treatment.
2022-23 Expenditures
0
2023-24 Main Estimates
4,935,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
4,200,000
Main Estimates Variance
(735,000)
Grants to graduate students, post-graduate students and Canadian post-secondary institutions to
increase professional capacity and training levels in order to build an effective public health sector
Purpose of the Class
These Terms & Conditions apply to the Public Health Scholarship and Fellowship Grant Program
which will enhance the capacity of the public health system by increasing capacity in people.
The objective of the Public Health Scholarship and Fellowship Grant Program is to increase the
number of new graduates who are trained in the different disciplines required for an effective public
health sector, and to increase the training levels of professionals already working in the public
health sector.
Explanation of Variance
There was an external transfer to CIHR submitted for the Applied Public Health Chairs Program in
the 24-25 ARLU for ($0.4M) -Minister Holland, Health
The Applied Public Health Chairs Program awards 6-year grants to support public health
professionals with the right knowledge, skills and relevant education and mentorship opportunities
to actively contribute to a revitalization of Canada’s public health faculty infrastructure in Canada.
2022-23 Expenditures
0
2023-24 Main Estimates
460,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
60,000
Main Estimates Variance
(400,000)
Grant under the Innovative Solutions Canada program
Purpose of the Class
The Innovative Solutions Canada (ISC) Program Terms and Conditions help establish a horizontal
mechanism that allows for the coordination of GoC efforts on innovation procurement initiatives
and the administration of financial assistance under the ISC program.
Explanation of Variance
A vote transfer from O&M to G&Cs was requested for $0.25M for the Innovative Solutions Canada
program’s Concussion Recognition & Food Access Challenge- Minister Holland, Health
The funding for the Concussion Challenge will help seek a solution that will enable the point of
need detection and prognosis of concussions to prevent subsequent injury, whereas the Food
Access Challenge is seeking solutions to help incease accessibility of nutritious foods in remote
and rural regions of Canada.
Funding for the ISC program has however been cut for the remaining two years (25-26 and 26-27)
due to B23 cuts.
2022-23 Expenditures
450,000
2023-24 Main Estimates
0
2024-25 Main Estimates
250,000
Main Estimates Variance
250,000
Contributions
Contributions to individuals and organizations to support health promotion projects in the areas of
building community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and
partnership building/intersectoral collaboration
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial assistance provided through contributions that
support the Public Health Agency of Canada's (PHAC) interest in promoting population health and
disease and injury prevention.
The goal of Promotion of Population Health Contributions is to increase the capacity of individuals
and communities to maintain and improve their health.
The key programs in this class are:
9-8-8 suicide prevention ($50.3M)
Federal Initiatives for HIV/AIDS ($15.6M)
ParticipACTION ($5M)
Mental Health ($4.8M)
Explanation of Variance
$50.3M in new funding for the 9-8-8 suicide prevention line will be received in 24-25- Minister Saks,
Mental Health and Addictions
This 3-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress will provide Canadians with safe,
high quality, equitable, accessible and evidence-based crisis support, 24/7/365.
$5M in renewal funding for ParticipACTION will be received in 24-25 - Minister Qualtrough, Sport
and Physical Activity
This funding would go towards the Let’s Get Moving Initiative. The programs’ purpose is to promote
physical activity, while also aiming to increase reach and engagement among populations with
increased risk of physical inactivity and bring awareness to the benefits of physical activity to
mental health and well-being.
($42.5M) decrease in funding for Mental Health of Those Affected by COVID-19 in 24-25- Minister
Saks, Mental Health and Addictions
This funding supports enhanced programming to address the mental health needs of populations
most affected by the pandemic, including youth, older adults, Inuit, Metis, Black and other
racialized populations, healthcare workers and essential service providers.
($9.9M) decrease in 24-25 due to 3-year plan adjustments in 23-24
2022-23 Expenditures
236,742,776
2023-24 Main Estimates
133,609,521
2024-25 Main Estimates
136,566,201
Main Estimates Variance
2,956,680
Contributions to non-profit organizations to support, on a long-term basis, the development and
provision of preventative and early intervention services aimed at addressing the health and
developmental problems experienced by young children at risk in Canada
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial assistance provided through contributions that
support the Public Health Agency of Canada's (PHAC) interest in promoting population health and
disease and injury prevention.
The goal of Promotion of Population Health Contributions is to increase the capacity of individuals
and communities to maintain and improve their health.
The key programs in this class are:
Community Action Program for Children ($53.4M)
Canadian Prenatal Nutrition Program ($27.2M)
Explanation of Variance
No variance - Minister Holland, Health
2022-23 Expenditures
83,088,064
2023-24 Main Estimates
83,978,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
83,978,000
Main Estimates Variance
0
Contributions to individuals and organizations in support of public health infrastructure
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial support and assistance provided through
contributions that support the Public Health Agency of Canada's (PHAC) interests in public health.
The purpose of the Public Health Contributions Program is to strengthen public health
infrastructure within Canada.
The key programs in this class are:
DUA ($3.2M)
Explanation of Variance
($5M) in funding for NML Innovative Tech has sunset in 23-24- Minister Holland, Health
The reprofiled funding supported the continuation and expansion of initiatives and services in
relation to the COVID-19 pandemic response. Specifically, it helped facilitate expansion of existing
COVID-19 programming for wastewater surveillance and genomic sequencing as well as replace
NMLB’s aging mobile laboratory.
DUA funding of $3M in 24-25 and nothing in 23-24 - Minister Holland, Health
This funding will help to stabilize and strengthen key public health monitoring, reporting and risk
assessment capacities in response to COVID-19. The pandemic response demonstrated that there
is a need to close gaps in accessing public health data as well as build infrastructure to better
monitor the health of Canadians and the response to future public health threats.
2022-23 Expenditures
25,629,436
2023-24 Main Estimates
5,000,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
3,230,000
Main Estimates Variance
(1,770,000)
Contributions to incorporated local or regional non-profit Aboriginal organizations and institutions
for the purpose of developing early intervention programs for Aboriginal pre-school children and
their families
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial assistance provided through contributions that
support the Public Health Agency of Canada's (PHAC) interest in promoting population health and
disease and injury prevention.
The goal of Promotion of Population Health Contributions is to increase the capacity of individuals
and communities to maintain and improve their health.
The key programs in this class are:
Aboriginal Head Start (legacy funding) /Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care ($68.3M)
Aboriginal Head Start – Strategic Fund ($4.2M)
Explanation of Variance
$11.6M in additional new funding for the IELCC new infrastructure and program transformation
investments in 24-25 Minister Holland, Health
The current submission represents the fourth in a series of Treasury Board Submissions to access
additional funding starting in 23-24 to support new IELCC infrastructure projects to facilitate
access to and expansion of programs and services.
2022-23 Expenditures
52,990,576
2023-24 Main Estimates
60,887,232
2024-25 Main Estimates
72,487,917
Main Estimates Variance
11,600,685
Pan-Canadian vaccine injury support program
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to the pan-Canadian Vaccine Injury Support Program. The
program will ensure that all people in Canada who have experienced a serious and permanent
injury as a result of receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine for protection from preventable
infectious disease, administered in Canada on or after December 8, 2020, have fair and timely
access to financial support.
Explanation of Variance
Vaccine Injury Support Program funding profile decreases by $10M in 24-25- Minister Holland,
Health
VISP ensures fair and timely access to financial support for all people in Canada in the event that
they experience a serious and permanent injury as a result of receiving a Health Canada authorized
vaccine administered in Canada.
2022-23 Expenditures
14,200,000
2023-24 Main Estimates
19,000,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
9,000,000
Main Estimates Variance
(10,000,000)
Contributions to Canadian Blood Services and/or other designated transfusion/transplantation
centres to support adverse event surveillance activities
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to the financial assistance provided through contributions to
Canadian Blood Services and/or other designated transfusion and/or transplantation centres to
support adverse event surveillance activities through the Blood Safety Contribution Program.
The purpose of the Blood Safety Contribution Program is to implement the Canadian Strategy on
Post-Market Surveillance for Blood, Cells, Tissues and Organs to develop, enhance, implement and
enhance transfer of knowledge, expertise and best practices in acute healthcare settings.
The key programs in this class are:
Blood 98 and Drug Safety ($2.2M)
Explanation of Variance
No variance- Minister Holland, Health
2022-23 Expenditures
1,736,256
2023-24 Main Estimates
2,190,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
2,190,000
Main Estimates Variance
0
Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to contribution funding provided to CABHI and provide a
framework for the administration of these funds via a single or multiple contribution agreements.
Explanation of Variance
No variance - Minister Holland, Health
2022-23 Expenditures
8,000,000
2023-24 Main Estimates
11,000,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
11,000,000
Main Estimates Variance
0
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment
Programs
GRANTS
Innovative Solutions Canada (ISC)
Purpose /Objectives
The ISC program supports the generation of new and unique intellectual property (IP) stimulation of
Research and Development collaborations, and growth of small businesses in the Canadian
innovation ecosystem.
Expected Results
CFIA's Innovative Solutions Canada grants will promote the development of innovative approaches
to improve sector outcomes.
2022–23 Expenditures
850,000
2023–24 Main Estimates
400,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
1,049,999
Original amount: 284,167
Plus transfer from Operating to Grants in 2024-25: 765,832
CONTRIBUTIONS
Federal Assistance Program (FAP)
Purpose /Objectives
The FAP supports projects and initiatives that advance CFIA's strategic outcome of a safe and
accessible food supply and plant and animal resource base.
Expected Results
The expected results include:
a. scientific and technical knowledge is advanced and/or enhanced;
b. individual knowledge and skills are developed and/or improved;
c. international collaborations are expanded and/or strengthened; and
d. organizations or initiatives are established or sustained.
2022–23 Expenditures
568,541
2023–24 Main Estimates
600,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
600,000
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENTS
Compensation Payments
Purpose /Objectives
Compensate Canadians, in accordance with the appropriate regulations, for plants or animals
ordered destroyed for the purpose of disease control.
Expected Results
In accordance with the Health of Animals Act and the Plant Protection Act, owners and/or
producers will be compensated for ordered destruction of animals or plants for the purpose of
disease control. Compensation will be provided according to the market value of the animals or
plants.
2022–23 Expenditures
119,382,097
2023–24 Main Estimates
12,500,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
12,500,000
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary ($ millions)
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Funding for the renewal of the Daily Shift Inspection Presence program
Description
The CFIA received Treasury Board (TB) approval for $15.6M in ongoing funding, beginning in 2023-
24, to maintain the Daily Shift Inspection Presence Program in all federal meat processing
establishments identified in a licence and delivered under the Safe Food for Canadians Act (SFC
licence), to meet the United States inspection frequency requirement to maintain market access.
This funding will allow the Agency to continue to provide the presence of an inspector once every 12
hours of operation in all federal meat processing establishments, as well as provide continuous
export opportunities for all establishments, while avoiding the creation of a two-tiered meat
inspection system in Canada.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
15.6
Net Change
15.6
Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for $31.4M in funding over two years (2023-24 to 2024-25), including
$14.2M in 2024-25, to ensure food safety through the continuation of risk-based compliance
verification of domestic and import food sectors in three key areas of work: improving risk
intelligence and oversight, offshore preventative activities, and improving stakeholder compliance.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
14.2
Net Change
14.2
Funding to establish a foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) vaccine bank for Canada, and to develop
FMD response plans
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for $57.5M in funding over five years, starting in 2023-24, with $5.6M
ongoing, to establish an FMD vaccine bank for Canada and to develop FMD response plans. The
Canadian FMD vaccine bank will serve as a strategic reserve of FMD vaccine antigen concentrate to
enable emergency vaccination in response to large FMD outbreaks affecting susceptible species of
Canada’s livestock industry (i.e. cloven-hoofed animals). The Government will also seek a cost-
sharing arrangement with provinces and territories.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
11.4
Net Change
11.4
Funding to secure market access for the Canadian agricultural sector
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for $12.5M in funding over two years (2023-24 to 2024-25), including
$5.8M in 2024-25, for securing market access for the agricultural sector. The overall objective is to
enable the CFIA to continue to maintain and expand market access for Canadian agriculture, agri-
food, seafood, and forestry products exported to global markets and facilitate the importation of
products into Canada.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
5.8
Net Change
5.8
Funding to implement Canadaʼs Indo-Pacific Strategy
Description
Global Affairs Canada (the Strategy lead), along with partner departments and agencies, received
access to new funding earmarked in the fiscal framework, starting in 2023-24, to implement
Canada’s Indo-Pacific Strategy. An off-cycle funding decision provided $2.26B over five years
(starting in FY 2023-24) and $175.4M per year ongoing in support of five objectives that will aim to:
1) promote peace, resilience, and security; 2) expand trade, investment, and supply chain
resilience; 3) invest and connect in people; 4) build a sustainable and green future; and 5) ensure
Canada’s role as an active and engaged partner to the region.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
3.2
Net Change
3.2
Funding Level Increases
Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade of regulated
animals other than livestock
Description
The CFIA received TB approval to access $20.5M over four years (2022-23 to 2025-26) to enable the
Agency to effectively respond to the increasing and significant health risks posed by the growth of
legal and illegal pet trade.
2023–24 Main Estimates
4.2
2024–25 Main Estimates
5.6
Net Change
1.4
Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and Drug
Regulations
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for funding of $10.0M over nine years and $300K ongoing, as
approved in Budget 2022, to support implementation of compliance and enforcement of new
amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations, also known as the Front of Package amendments,
which include other amendments on vitamin D fortification, labelling for aspartame, and
prohibition of partially hydrogenated oils. These regulations came into effect in July 2022 with a
transition period ending on December 31, 2025. Funding will be used to develop compliance
promotion and enforcement strategies, prepare guidance for industry, and training for inspectors.
Ongoing funding will support long-term compliance and enforcement activities, including response
to complaints and inspections.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.8
2024–25 Main Estimates
1.0
Net Change
0.2
Other - Increases
Funding for Collective Bargaining
Description
A total increase of $40.7M in 2024-25 related to collective agreement funding to be received by the
Agency.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
40.7
Net Change
40.7
Transfer from the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to deliver initiatives related to market
access under the Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership
Description
Transfer from Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC) to the CFIA for the Sustainable Canadian
Agricultural Partnership initiative. The Sustainable Agricultural Partnership initiative is a five-year,
$3.5B investment by federal, provincial, and territorial governments aimed at strengthening the
agriculture, agri-food, and agri-based products sector. The objective of the CFIA’s market access
work through this funding is to ensure the Agency is able to conduct its critical functions associated
with administering and enforcing legislation related to the import and export of food, animal, and
plant products.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
5.2
Net Change
5.2
Funding Level Decreases
Funding to maintain programming which mitigates the public health, animal health and economic
risks related to Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE)
Description
BSE programming was first implemented in 2003. As announced in Budget 2019, the program was
renewed as a sunsetter for five years with funding of $35.3M per year from 2019-20 to 2023-24
allocated to the CFIA, and about $2M per year to Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of
Canada.
2023–24 Main Estimates
35.3
2024–25 Main Estimates
0.0
Net Change
(35.3)
Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia
Description
As part of the federal government’s commitment to establishing and maintaining modern federal
science infrastructure, Budget 2017 committed $80.0M over five years (2019-20 to 2024-25) to
replace the Sidney Centre for Plant Health with a new, world class plant health research facility to
help support the safety of Canada’s agriculture and agri-food sector while facilitating trade and
economic growth that benefits Canadians. The new, world-class Centre for Plant Health will
support the science outcomes detailed in the Federal Science and Technology Infrastructure
Initiative (FSTII), help to set the stage for portfolio management of scientific assets and
infrastructure, and implement IM/IT solutions to support federal scientists in their important work.
2023–24 Main Estimates
29.7
2024–25 Main Estimates
20.1
Net Change
(9.6)
Funding to address the current potato wart crisis in Prince Edward Island
Description
The CFIA received a total of $11.3M in funding over two years ($5.7M in 2022-23 and $5.6M in 2023-
24) to address the current potato wart crisis in Prince Edward Island (PEI), develop operational
capacity, respond to international market pressures, and establish a science-based approach that
will minimize further long-term spread within and outside PEI, and protect market access.
2023–24 Main Estimates
5.7
2024–25 Main Estimates
0.0
Net Change
(5.7)
Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant, and animal products
Description
Budget 2019 announced funding of $25.1M over 5 years ($2.4M in 2019-20, $5.7M in 2020-21,
$6.3M in 2021-22, $5.5M in 2022-23, and $5.2M in 2023-24) for the CFIA to continue digitizing its
export certification activities. This is in line with the Government’s commitment to providing
Canadians with reliable, accessible, and secure services that are seamless and digitally enabled.
Through this proposal, the CFIA aimed to advance the replacement of its paper-based system for
issuing export certificates with digital tools to allow Canadian exporters to apply for and receive
certificates online. This funding enabled the CFIA to further digitize transactions with its regulated
parties and foreign competent authorities through the Digital Service Delivery Platform.
2023–24 Main Estimates
5.2
2024–25 Main Estimates
0.0
Net Change
(5.2)
Funding for building a post pandemic agile workforce and to support long-term digital
transformation
Description
The CFIA has received funding of $61.7M over three years (2022-23 to 2024-25), as approved in
Budget 2022, to prepare for the post-pandemic operating environment. Its aim is to help build an
agile workforce and support longer-term digital transformation by: 1) upskilling inspectors on
essential training that was previously unavailable to them due to COVID-19 restrictions; 2)
addressing deferred maintenance for digital services; and 3) examining opportunities for virtual
inspection.
2023–24 Main Estimates
21.9
2024–25 Main Estimates
17.9
Net Change
(4.0)
Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine fever
Description
AAFC, the CFIA, and the Canadian Border Services Agency have received funding of $45.3M over
three years (2022-23 to 2024-25) to support near-term actions for the prevention, preparedness,
and anticipatory trade continuity response initiatives to prevent the entry of African swine fever into
Canada. The CFIA total ask over the duration of the funding proposal is $18.9M.
2023–24 Main Estimates
7.7
2024–25 Main Estimates
5.8
Net Change
(1.9)
Funding of the Innovative Solution Canada (ISC) Grant Reprofile (from 2021-22)
Description
CFIA received grant authority under the ISC grant program Terms and Conditions along with 19
other federal organizations to support small business innovations through posting online
challenges.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.4
2024–25 Main Estimates
0.3 (excludes transfer in 2024-25 of 0.8 from Operating to Grants)
Net Change
(0.1)
Other – Decreases
Refocusing Government Spending
Description
In Budget 2022, the Government announced the launch of a comprehensive Strategic Policy Review
with the objective of generating savings of $6.0B from 2024-25 to 2026-27 and $3.0B annually by
2026-27. Budget 2023 augments these commitments to achieve ongoing savings of $4.5B annually
by 2026-27. Budget 2023 announced a reduction of $500M to organizations’ travel budgets and
spending on professional services starting in 2023-24, and ongoing savings of $1.7B annually by
2024-25. The CFIA will reduce spending by $12.4M in 2024-25, $18.3M in 2025-26, and $26.5M in
2026-27 and ongoing.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
(12.4)
Net Change
(12.4)
Employee Benefit Plan (EBP) adjustments
Description
The Annual Reference Level Update Employee Benefit Plan rate was decreased by 1.4%.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
(7.9)
Net Change
(7.9)
Transfer to Global Affairs Canada for staff on missions abroad
Description
Transfer to Global Affairs Canada from the CFIA in the amount of $0.6M to adjust funding previously
provided for departmental staff located at missions abroad. The transfer will be on an ongoing
basis.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
(0.6)
Net Change
(0.6)
Transfer to Health Canada for Improving Food Safety
Description
Transfer from the CFIA to the Department of Health in the amount of $0.6M for ensuring food safety
through the continuation of risk-based compliance verification of domestic and import food
sectors.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
(0.6)
Net Change
(0.6)
Transfer to Treasury Board Secretariat for the Organizational Project Management Capacity
Assessment (OPMCA) and Project Complexity and Risk Assessment (PCRA)
Description
Transfer from the CFIA to Treasury Board Secretariat in the amount of $0.2M for the OPMCA and
PCRA. Testing and feedback from departments demonstrated that the renewed tools were
expected to increase management utility by providing clearer information on organizational
strengths and potential areas for improvement, and by more effectively integrating OPMCA and
PCRA results to better inform project risk management planning and oversight.
2023–24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024–25 Main Estimates
(0.2)
Net Change
(0.2)
2024-25 Main Estimates
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
691.4
Increases
85.0
Decreases
66.7
Net Change
18.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
709.7
% Change This Year over Last Year
2.6%
(in millions $)
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
150.7
Increases
12.7
Decreases
16.8
Net Change
(4.1)
2024-25 Main Estimates
146.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
(2.7%)
(in millions $)
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
842.1
Increases
97.7
Decreases
83.5
Net Change
14.2
2024-25 Main Estimates
856.3
% Change This Year over Last Year
1.7%
Note: Figures may not add due to rounding.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency has a proposed net increase of $14.2M in its 2024-25 Main
Estimates (from $842.1M in 2023-24 to $856.3M in 2024-25).
Increases of $97.7M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed Treasury Board Submissions [$50.2M]
Funding for the renewal of the Daily Shift Inspection Presence program ($15.6M)
Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures ($14.2M)
Funding to establish a foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) vaccine bank for Canada, and to develop
FMD response plans ($11.4M)
Funding to secure market access for the Canadian agricultural sector ($5.8M)
Funding to implement Canadaʼs Indo-Pacific Strategy ($3.2M)
Funding Level Increases [$1.6M]
Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade of regulated
animals other than livestock ($1.4M)
Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and Drug
Regulations ($0.2M)
Other [$45.9M]
Funding for Collective Bargaining ($40.7M)
Transfer from the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to deliver initiatives related to market
access under the Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership ($5.2M)
Decreases of $83.5M (including Statutory)
Funding Level Decreases [$61.8M]
Funding to maintain programming which mitigates the public health, animal health and economic
risks related to Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy ($35.3M)
Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia ($9.6M)
Funding to address the current Potato Wart crisis in Prince Edward Island ($5.7M)
Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant, and animal products ($5.2M)
Funding for building a post pandemic agile workforce and to support long-term digital
transformation ($4.0M)
Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine fever
($1.9M)
Funding of the Innovative Solution Canada Grant Reprofile (from 2021-22) ($0.1M)
Other [$21.7M]
Refocusing Government Spending ($12.4M)
Employee Benefit Plan (EBP) adjustments ($7.9M)
Transfer to Global Affairs Canada for staff on missions abroad ($0.6M)
Transfer to Health Canada for Improving Food Safety ($0.6M)
Transfer to Treasury Board Secretariat for the Organizational Project Management Capacity
Assessment and Project Complexity and Risk Assessment ($0.2M)
Statutory Appropriations
A net funding decrease of $4.1M in Statutory authorities mainly relates to EBP adjustments.
For information purposes, Statutory authorities included in the 2024-25 Main Estimates consists of
Statutory revenue of $53.0M, Statutory compensation payments of $12.5M, and EBP of $81.1M.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment
Programs
CIHR
“GRANTS FOR RESEARCH PROJECTS AND PERSONNEL SUPPORT” TRANSFER PAYMENT PROGRAM
World-Class Health Data System for Canadians
Purpose /Objectives
This funding will allow national health data partners to work together to advance a national vision
for a world-class health data system.
$9.9 million in 2024-25, $5.4 million in 2025-26, $5.3 million in 2026-27 and $5.7 million in 2027-28.
Expected Results
Disaggregated data needed to report on the number of youth in Canada with access to Integrated
Youth Services for mental health and substance use will be harmonized and standardized to
support further research, knowledge mobilization and decision making.
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
-
2024–25 Main Estimates
8,800,140
To learn more about Dementia and Brain Health
Purpose /Objectives
As announced in Budget 2022, this new funding ($20 million from 2022-23 to 2026-27) will be used
to ramp up efforts to learn more about dementia and brain health, to improve treatment and
outcomes for persons living with dementia, and to evaluate and address mental health
consequences for caregivers and different models of care.
$1.4 million in 2022-23 (provided through Supps C), $3.1 million in 2023-24, $5.3 million in 2024-25,
$5.3 million in 2025-26 and $4.5 million in 2026-27.
Expected Results
Research related to dementia and brain health is increased, improve outcomes for persons living
with dementia and their caregivers.
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
2,480,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
4,650,000
Funding to gather national data on trends in drug use and harms in Canada
Purpose /Objectives
Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) will support a Canada-wide study
on controlled substances that will generate baseline data for substance use on the current
situation relating to controlled substance use in Canada and signal emerging threats.
Total funding transfer from Health Canada to CIHR amounts to $6M over four fiscal years (2024-25
to 2027-28).
Expected Results
Population estimates of the use of controlled substances and related knowledge of trends in
Canada are generated, and knowledge is shared
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
-
2024–25 Main Estimates
1,500,000
Pediatric Cancer Research
Purpose /Objectives
This funding is from Budget 2021, which allocated $30M over three years to fund pediatric cancer
research leading to the development of new scientifically proven treatments and cures that can
lead to better outcomes and healthier lives for young patients.
This items sunsets in 2023-24.
Expected Results
Advancements in pediatric cancer research are made that can lead to better outcomes and
healthier lives for young patients.
2022–23 Expenditures
15,702,625
2023–24 Main Estimates
14,087,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
-
Cervical Cancer in Canada
Purpose /Objectives
Funding of $10M was provided over five years, to support research on Human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccination and screening methods to contribute to a reduction of cervical cancer in Canada.
This item sunsets 2023-24.
Expected Results
Contribute to the reduction of cervical cancer in Canada by supporting research on Human
papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination.
2022–23 Expenditures
2,048,605
2023–24 Main Estimates
2,050,169
2024–25 Main Estimates
-
To address the Opioid crisis
Purpose /Objectives
Funding was provided to support research to consolidate and analyze the results of pilot projects
that offer safer alternatives to the illegal supply and their impact on the communities within which
they operate, and increase the evidence base on methamphetamine treatment guidelines and
advance priority research.
This item sunsets in 2023-24, though supplementary funds ($225K) have been transferred from HC
to CIHR in 2024-25.
Expected Results
Pilot projects that offer safer alternatives to the illegal supply and their impact on the communities
within which they operate are analyzed.
Evidence is generated on methamphetamine treatment guidelines
2022–23 Expenditures
1,845,626
2023–24 Main Estimates
2,300,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
-
Reprofiling of the Clinical Trials Fund
Purpose /Objectives
Funding level decrease due to the re-profile of funds from 2023-24 and 2024-25 to 2025-26 ad
2026-27 to support the final competition for clinical trials projects.
Expected Results
An array of clinical trials phases, designs, and objectives across a broad range of health research
areas, aligning with the priorities of the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy, are
supported.
2022–23 Expenditures
65,878,656
2023–24 Main Estimates
74,790,826
2024–25 Main Estimates
71,114,308
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENT PROGRAMS
Canada Excellence Research Chairs Program
Purpose /Objectives
The CERC is a Tri-agency program that is administered by the Tri-agency Institutional Programs
Secretariat, which is housed within the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council and
represents and coordinates the interests of the three federal granting agencies.
This funding, announced in Budget 2022, will support new recruited Chairs in the fields of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics—reinforcing Canada’s competitive advantage as a
destination of choice for world-class researchers.
$78.5 million over 8 fiscal years, starting in 2023-24 ($5.8 million received through SEA). An
additional $2.7 million was transferred from the other councils to CIHR over 7 fiscal years, starting
in 2024-25, recalibrate the authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based
proportionately on the research areas addressed by the successful applications.
Expected Results
New recruited Chairs in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics are
supported.
Canada’s competitive advantage as a destination of choice for world-class researchers is
reinforced.
2022–23 Expenditures
4,200,000
2023–24 Main Estimates
5,800,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
13,137,901
Canada Graduate Scholarships
Purpose /Objectives
The CGS program provides special recognition and financial support to students who are pursuing
masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada.
The increase is mainly the result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate
Scholarships allocations within the program, between the three granting agencies, to re-align with
the research landscape.
Expected Results
Students who are pursuing masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada are
recognized and supported financially.
Re-align the allocation of funding amongst the three granting agencies with the research landscape.
2022–23 Expenditures
36,226,076
2023–24 Main Estimates
39,047,500
2024–25 Main Estimates
41,847,500
Canada First Research Excellence Fund
Purpose /Objectives
The key objective of the CFREF is to help competitively selected Canadian postsecondary
institutions turn their key strengths into world-leading capabilities.
The Tri-Agency Steering Committee approved the results and integrity of the review process for the
third CFREF competition in February 2023. The purpose of this transfer is to recalibrate the
authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based proportionately on the research areas
addressed by the successful applications. For CIHR, this represents an additional $64.8M over 6
years starting in 2024-25.
Expected Results
Key strengths of Canadian postsecondary institutions turn into world-leading capabilities.
Authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR are based proportionately on the research
areas addressed by the successful applications.
2022–23 Expenditures
38,748,944
2023–24 Main Estimates
47,227,134
2024–25 Main Estimates
58,407,137
CIHR 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
New and Renewed TB Submissions – Increases
Building a World-Class Health Data System for Canadians
Description
Funding for Health Canada, Statistics Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, and the
Canadian Institute for Health Information ($194 million over five years, including $26.4 million to
CIHR), for national health data partners to work together to advance a national vision for a world-
class health data system.
$9.9 million in 2024-25, $5.4 million in 2025-26, $5.3 million in 2026-27 and $5.7 million in 2027-28.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
9.9
Net Change (in millions)
9.9
Canada Excellence Research Chairs (CERC)
Description
Funding to support new Chairs in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics—
reinforcing Canada’s competitive advantage as a destination of choice for world-class researchers
(announced in Budget 2022).
The CERC is a Tri-agency program that is administered by the Tri-agency Institutional Programs
Secretariat (TIPS), which is housed within the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
and represents and coordinates the interests of the three federal granting agencies.
$78.5 million over 8 fiscal years, starting in 2023-24 ($5.8 million received through Supplementary
Estimates A). An additional $2.7 million was transferred from the other councils to CIHR over 7
fiscal years, starting in 2024-25, recalibrate the authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and
CIHR based proportionately on the research areas addressed by the successful applications.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.8
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
13.1
Net Change (in millions)
7.3
Funding Level Increases
Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF)
Description
The key objective of the CFREF is to help competitively selected Canadian postsecondary
institutions turn their key strengths into world-leading capabilities.
The Tri-Agency Steering Committee approved the results and integrity of the review process for the
third CFREF competition in February 2023. purpose of this transfer is to recalibrate the authorities
appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based proportionately on the research areas addressed
by the successful applications. For CIHR, this represents an additional $64.8M over 6 years starting
in 2024-25.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
47.2
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
58.4
Net Change (in millions)
11.2
Canada Graduate Scholarships
Description
The CGS program provides special recognition and financial support to students who are pursuing
masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada.
The increase is mainly the result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate
Scholarships allocations within the program, between the three granting agencies, to re-align with
the research landscape.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
39.2
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
41.8
Net Change (in millions)
2.8
Dementia and Brain Health in Aging
Description
Funding level increase to continue to support research across the continuum from promoting brain
health in aging to addressing the complex care needs of people living with dementia and their
caregivers.
Research activities focus on resilience, cognitive reserve and vulnerabilities in brain aging, as well
as modifiable factors for reduction of risk of development and progression of cognitive impairment
and dementia.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
3.1
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.3
Net Change (in millions)
2.2
Other - Increases
Compensation adjustments resulting from collective agreements
Description
Incemental funding to support salary increases of its employees.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
6.4
Net Change (in millions)
6.4
Gather national data on trends in drug use and harms in Canada
Description
Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) will support a Canada-wide study
on controlled substances that will generate baseline data for substance use on the current
situation relating to controlled substance use in Canada and signal emerging threats. Total funding
transfer from Health Canada to CIHR amounts to $6M over four fiscal years (2024-25 to 2027-28).
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
1.5
Net Change (in millions)
1.5
Non-material variances under $1.5M
Description
A total of $1.9M comprised of non-material items with funding variances of under $1.5M.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
1.9
Sunset - Decreases
Pediatric Cancer Research
Description
Funding from Budget 2021 of $30M over three years to fund pediatric cancer research leading to the
development of new scientifically proven treatments and cures that can lead to better outcomes
and healthier lives for young patients.
This items sunsets in 2023-24.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
14.6
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(14.6)
Cervical Cancer in Canada
Description
Off-cycle funding of $10M was provided over five years, to support research on Human
papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination and screening methods to contribute to a reduction of cervical
cancer in Canada.
This item sunsets 2023-24.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
2.1
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(2.1)
Funding to address the Opioid crisis
Description
Funding from Budget 2019 and off-cycle budget decision of $7.2 over four years to fund research to
consolidate and analyze the results of pilot projects that offer safer alternatives to the illegal supply
and their impact on the communities within which they operate, and to to fund projects that
increase the evidence base on methamphetamine treatment guidelines and advance priority
research.
This item (tranche of fundig tied to the TB submission) sunsets in 2023-24, though supplementary
funds ($225K) have been transferred from HC to CIHR in 2024-25.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
2.4
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(2.4)
Other - Decreases
Reprofiling of the Clinical Trials Fund
Description
Funding level decrease due to the re-profile of funds from 2023-24 and 2024-25 to 2025-26 ad
2026-27 to support the final competition for clinical trials projects.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
81.4
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
76.7
Net Change (in millions)
(4.7)
Refocusing government spending to deliver for Canadians
Description
As part of meeting this commitment, CIHR is planning to reduce spending on its activities such as
travel and professional services.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(1.4)
Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plan
Description
A total decrease of $0.1M in net year-over-year changes related to employee benefit plan
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(0.1)
2024-25 Main Estimates
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
1,342.8
Increases
43.2
Decreases
(25.2)
Net Change
18.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
1,360.8
% Change This Year over Last Year
1.3%
(in millions $)
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
8.9
Increases
0.0
Decreases
(0.1)
Net Change
(0.1)
2024-25 Main Estimates
8.8
% Change This Year over Last Year
(1.1%)
(in millions $)
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
1,351.7
Increases
43.2
Decreases
(25.3)
Net Change
17.9
2024-25 Main Estimates
1,369.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
CIHR has a proposed net increase of $17.9M in its 2024-25 Main Estimates (from $1,351.7M in
2023-24 to $1,369.6M in 2024-25).
Increases of $43.2M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed TB Submissions increase [ $17.2M]
Funding for building a World-Class Health Data System for Canadians ($9.9M)
Funding for the Canada Excellence Research Chairs ($7.3M)
Funding Level Increases [$16.2M]
Funding for the Canada First Research Excellence Fund ($11.2M)
Funding to reflect the distribution of the Canada Graduate Scholarships ($2.8M)
Funding to learn more about Dementia and Brain Health in Aging ($2.2M)
Other [$9.8M]
Funding for compensation adjustments resulting from collective agreements ($6.4M)
Funding to gather national data on trends in drug use and harms in Canada ($1.5M)
Non-material variances under $1.5M, resulting in a net increase ($1.9M)
Decreases of $25.2M (including Statutory)
Sunset [$19.1M]
Funding for Pediatric Cancer Research ($14.6M)
Funding for Cervical Cancer in Canada ($2.1M)
Funding to address the Opioid crisis ($2.4M)
Other [$6.1M]
Reprofiling of the Clinical Trials Fund ($4.7M)
Refocusing government spending to deliver for Canadians ($1.4M)
Statutory Appropriations - Net funding decrease of $0.1M relates mainly to employee benefits plan
adjustments.
PERSONAL SUPPORT WORKERS
ISSUE
A shortage of Personal Support Workers (PSWs) across Canada has been a longstanding issue and
was exacerbated by the pandemic, with demand exceeding supply.
KEY FACTS
According to the Statistics Canada 2021 Census, there were approximately 380,000 PSWs working
in the health sector (this included full-time and part-time workers, for an estimated 280,000 full-
time equivalents).
PSWs are an unregulated workforce that provide the majority of direct care for Canadian seniors
and persons with disabilities. Virtually all care assistance with activities of daily living is provided by
PSWs. PSWs provide care primarily in long-term care facilities, in home care, and in hospitals.
Personal support workers have different titles across the country. For example, while Ontario uses
“personal support worker”, other provinces may use “health care aide” (Alberta and Manitoba),
“continuing care assistant” (Saskatchewan and Nova Scotia), “health care assistant” (British
Columbia), or “orderly” (Quebec).
Persistent issues within the PSW field include chronic understaffing, stress, burnout, and
challenging working conditions. In addition, the sector is over-represented by immigrants, women,
older workers, and racialized populations. As an unregulated profession, there is little consistency
across the sector to ensure alignment of required competencies and scopes of practice.
PSW wages vary by province and territory (PT) as well as by sector. Based on the latest data from
Statistics Canada’s Labour Force Survey (2022/23), the median hourly wage in Canada for PSWs
was $20/hour in the home care sector and $23/hour across all other sectors (i.e., hospitals, long-
term care facilities).
KEY MESSAGES
Personal support workers provide critical care that supports Canadians with serious functional
limitations, due to age or disability, to live with dignity.
The Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians plan outlined an investment of $1.7
billion over 5 years to support provinces and territories and improve recruitment and retention of
personal support workers, by helping to ensure these workers have access to fair and equitable
working conditions, with particular focus on improved wages.
The funding will to help support the critical role personal support workers play in providing care to
Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON AMENDMENTS TO AGING WITH DIGNITY AGREEMENTS
The existing Aging with Dignity agreements include:
$2.4 billion to improve access to home and community care; and
$3 billion to apply standards of care in long-term care facilities and help support workforce stability.
Our government is collaborating with provinces and territories to implement an amendment to
these Agreements to provide $1.7 billion over 5 years to provinces and territories to help support
personal support workers.
These investments will support improved access to home and long-term care, as every person in
Canada deserves to age in dignity, safety, and comfort, regardless of where they live.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL SUPPORT FOR PERSONAL SUPPORT WORKERS
We continue to work with provincial and territorial governments on how best to support recruitment
and retention of personal support workers.
In addition to the $1.7 billion for wage increases, the federal government has made the following
additional investments to support PSWs and the long-term care sector:
$1 billion to PTs through the Safe Long Term Care Fund for long term care, which could be used for
hiring more staff or raising wages.
$3 billion through Budget 2021 for long term care, which could be used to address health workforce
issues.
Up to $50 million to strengthen the retirement savings of personal support workers.
BACKGROUND
Mandate Letters
Previous Minister of Health Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports. Specific
commitments include:
Train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
The 2021 Liberal Party Platform noted that “…we will work with provinces and territories, respecting
their jurisdiction, to support seniors with an investment of $9 billion over 5 years to support safer
conditions for seniors and improve wages and working conditions for personal support workers.”
and more specifically “continue working with the provinces and territories to: raise wages for
personal support workers, including a guaranteed minimum wage of at least $25 per hours.”
Challenges With Respect to Personal Support Workers
The COVID-19 pandemic surfaced long-standing challenges in health care delivery, particularly in
long-term care facilities. Reports from workers, residents, and families highlighted common
instances of reduced or absent care in home care and long-term care, with significant impacts on
vulnerable older Canadians. Provincial inquiries identified common challenges, including the need
for increasing staffing levels and fostering retention programs (particularly for PSWs).
PSWs perform jobs that are both mentally and physically exhausting. They typically do not have the
same job protections, compensation, and workplace pension coverage as others in the health care
sector. They often face precarious employment with part-time, temporary, or contract jobs that may
be associated with difficult working conditions. They often lack paid sick days and extended health
benefits which can lead to adverse health and psychosocial conditions. While low wages are of
concern for this sector, factors such as the insecure nature of their work, unsafe work
environments, staffing shortages and unsatisfactory working hours lead to burnout, which 43% of
PSWs cited as their primary reason for leaving the profession.
The demand for PSWs will continue to increase. Estimates from McMaster University (2022)
indicate that Canada’s residential care system alone (long-term care and retirement homes) needs
13,500 more PSWs in the near term, and 10,000 additional PSWs each year. The current and
continuing forecasted need for PSWs is driven largely by demographic changes: currently, there are
close to 3.1 million Canadians who are 75 years of age or older, and this segment of the population
is projected to grow by over 120% to 6.8 million persons over the next 30 years.
In a 2018 survey conducted by the Ontario Long Term Care Association, 80% of Ontario long-term
care facilities had difficulty filling shifts, and 90% experienced challenges recruiting staff. PSW job
vacancies have almost doubled since the beginning of the pandemic and nearly half of employers
report having tried to fill a vacancy for more than four months. Long-term care facilities are
reporting difficulties providing planned care hours. Overall, competition for these workers is
increasing between care environments. Data from the 2022 Job Vacancy and Wage Survey and
Labour Force Survey show a 7.5% vacancy rate for PSWs.
Wages for PSWs vary by PT. Yearly salary increases as well as pay increase initiatives underway in a
number of PTs will have raised PSW wages since the last Statistics Canada Labour Force Survey
data (2022/23), which demonstrates that the median hourly wage is approximately $20 - $23.
Other than wages, factors of PSW job quality – such as full time and permanent employment,
unionization, and pension plans – also vary by sector; they tend to be the least available in the
home care sector, more available in long-term care, and most available in the hospital sector. In
addition to wages, improvements such as increasing full-time employment, full-year employment,
and employer-based pension plans could increase recruitment and retention for PSWs.
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians Plan - Personal Support Worker Wage
Support
Budget 2023 outlined the federal government’s plan to provide close to $200 billion (2023 Fall
Economic Statement estimate is now over $200 billion) over ten years in health transfers to
provinces and territories, including through tailored bilateral agreements to meet the needs of each
province and territory.
The Government of Canada collaborated with provinces and territories to implement Aging with
Dignity bilateral agreements focused on the shared priority of helping Canadians age with dignity
closer to home, with access to home care or care in a safe long-term care facility.
Through amendments to the Aging with Dignity agreements, the federal government will provide
$1.7 billion over five years to provinces and territories to support hourly wage increases for personal
support workers and related professions, and recruitment and retention measures.
