Created: 2024-06-03T13:41:01.860779
Name: Infographic:_Protecting_your_indoor_air_from_outdoor_pollutants
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/healthy-living/infographic-protecting-indoor-air-outdoor-pollutants.html
Package ID: d3a52556-483f-48a1-9f87-8d3bba8f3dbb
Keywords: ['Infographic', 'protecting', 'indoor air', 'outdoor pollutants', 'poor air quality', 'children', 'elderly', 'elderly with pre-existing-health-conditions', 'remain indoors', 'good indoor-air-quality', 'poor outdoor-air-quality']
Notes: When outdoor air quality is poor, Health Canada recommends that individuals, particularly children, the elderly and those with pre-existing health conditions remain indoors as much as possible. Ensuring good indoor air quality is especially important during periods of poor outdoor air quality.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Infographic: Protecting your indoor air - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Healthy living Health and the environment Air quality and health Infographic: Protecting your indoor air Download the alternative format (PDF format, 651 Kb, 2 pages) Organization: Health Canada Date published: May 2024 You can do many things to ensure good indoor air quality. This is especially important during periods of poor outdoor air quality when you may spend more time indoors as a result. One important step is to install and maintain at least 1 carbon monoxide alarm in your home. Install the alarm(s) near bedrooms and preferably 1 on each floor. Keep outdoor air pollutants out Keep windows and doors closed and use air conditioning (where available) if the weather is warm. Properly seal windows and doors with weather stripping. In homes with forced air ventilation, use a clean, good quality air filter based on the manufacturer's recommendations to help remove fine particles from the incoming air. Keep up-to-date about outdoor air quality conditions in your region by checking: Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) forecasts InfoSmog forecasts for Quebec Active weather warnings and air quality advisories provincial and territorial governments' websites Reduce air contaminants from indoor sources Don't smoke indoors. When possible, limit the use of any combustion source, such as incense and candles. Make sure fuel-burning appliances are installed, maintained and working according to manufacturers' instructions. Use certified portable air cleaners with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration to help improve air quality by removing fine particles that can be a risk to your health. You may have to change or replace filters more often, depending on use and conditions. Avoid devices that produce ozone, as ozone can impact your health. The California Air Regulatory Board (CARB) lists air cleaners that have passed testing for ozone emissions. Address sources of indoor moisture to prevent mould growth. Maintain humidity levels between 30 and 50%, using a dehumidifier as necessary. Consider selecting low emission cleaning products. Some products may emit high levels of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Follow the directions for use and precautions listed on the label. Store cleaning products, paints and solvents in areas away from living spaces. Use a vacuum cleaner with a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter. You can remove settled dust by wiping and wet mopping. Wood smoke from wood burning appliances You can be exposed to wood smoke: both indoors and outdoors from your own burning activities or from those of others in your area. If you use a wood stove or fireplace, take steps to reduce the impacts of wood smoke, such as choosing a low-emission stove and burning wisely. For more information on protecting your indoor air, visit www.canada.ca/air-health or contact us at air@hc-sc.gc.ca. Page details Date modified: 2024-05-30 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy