Created: 2024-01-31T18:51:33.305018
Name: Consumer_Product_Enforcement_Summary_Report_-_Cyclical_Enforcement_Project_2017-2018:_Glazed_Ceramics_and_Glassware_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/consumer-product-enforcement-glazed-ceramics-glassware-2018.html
Package ID: d652bb97-dfff-4c70-a478-9083627ed2cf
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'CCPSA', 'cyclical enforcement project', 'compliance of ceramic-foodware-products', 'Glazed Ceramics-and-Glassware Regulations.']
Notes: The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of ceramic foodware products with the requirements of the Glazed Ceramics and Glassware Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2017-2018: Glazed Ceramics and Glassware Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2017-2018: Glazed Ceramics and Glassware Regulations Fiscal Year 2017-2018 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and regulations made under it. The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of ceramic foodware products with the requirements of the Glazed Ceramics and Glassware Regulations. For this project, compliance of select ceramic foodware products with the Glazed Ceramics and Glassware Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors visited establishments and sampled relevant products. Compliance with the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CE project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of glazed ceramic companies in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2017-2018 fiscal year, chemical testing of 5 different products was carried out. All products were compliant and no corrective actions were required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action H&M Textured Cup - Light Pink Hennes & Mauritz Inc. No compliance issues detected None No Brand Name Stoneware cup/mug Kayali 12 oz. No.1952 Dollar Max Dépôt No compliance issues detected None No Brand Name Kam Kuo Trading Co 9" Flat Plate Kam Kuo Trading Corp.(Canada) No compliance issues detected None Steven.h Ceramics Gift Market Ceramic Mug Gift Market Discount Centre No compliance issues detected None Torre & Tagus Kiri Porc Rect Tapas Plate Torre & Tagus No compliance issues detected None Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2018-10-05 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy