Created: 2020-08-19T15:50:27.516742
Name: APPEARANCE_OF_THE_MINISTER_OF_HEALTH_
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/d689eb97-7bce-44a2-a422-8adc9f294ca6/resource/14bf8073-92a4-4b46-a5ba-7cf41b344fea/download/cusersjdavitskdesktopcow-april-20-english.pdf
Package ID: d689eb97-7bce-44a2-a422-8adc9f294ca6
Keywords: ['COVID-19', 'pandemic', 'Coronavirus', 'Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: Briefing binder for the Minister of Health’s appearance at Committee of the Whole on April 20, 2020
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
APPEARANCE OF THE MINISTER OF HEALTH
House of Commons Committee of the Whole
April 20, 2020 (TBD)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. PPE
A. Procurement and Stockpiles
B. PPE guidance for frontline workers
C. Guidance for general public on use of non-medical masks
2. Strengthening Health System Capacity
A. Launch of National Recruitment Campaign
B. Mental Health Tools
C. Hospital/Health Care Capacity
D. Health Human Resources
3. Drug, Health Products and Medical Devices
A. Drug Shortages
B. Regulatory Review of Drugs and Devices
C. Claims to treat, prevent or cure COVID
D. Ventilator Supply
4. Vulnerable Populations
A. Indigenous Communities / North
B. Support for opioid users during COVID-19 Outbreak
C. Long-term care guidance
D. Federal correctional facilities
5. Test Kits
A. Test Kit Approval
B. Testing Capacity / PT testing strategies / rapid testing
C. Procurement of Reagents
6. Border, Travel, Quarantine and Self-Isolation
A. Border measures
7. Serological Surveillance
A. Future Steps
8. International
A. WHO – Impacts of US funding decision
B. G7 and G20
9. Communications to Canadians
A. Websites, phone lines, digital tools and apps
10. Vaccine
A. Vaccine Research
B. Timeline for Vaccine Development
11. Modelling
A. Projections on cases and deaths
B. PT modelling - Differences in infection rates
1.A - Procurement and Stockpile
 The Government of Canada is continuously working to
secure contracts for critical PPE supplies and medical
equipment, and expedite delivery of supplies to our
frontline healthcare workers.
 Canada is receiving PPE shipments, and is working rapidly
to allocate the supplies to the provinces and territories as
per an approach agreed upon by federal-provincial-
territorial Ministers of Health.
 For example, since April 1, we have shipped approximately
1.2 million N95 respirators, 6 million surgical masks, and 8
million nitrile gloves to provinces and territories, and more
are expected to arrive and be distributed in the coming
days.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is also
deploying PPEs and ventilators from its National
Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) in response to
urgent requests for assistance from provinces and
territories.
 In addition, the Government of Canada is also receiving
offers of donations from international and domestic
organizations via the donations portal on the Government
of Canada COVID-19 website.
 We have received and shipped to provinces and territories
donations of 10,000 industrial N95 masks, 350,000 N95
and equivalent masks, 200,000 face masks (not N95), and
400,000 gloves.
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking the
necessary action to continue to protect the health and
safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ADDRESSING THE
GLOBAL SHORTAGE OF PPE SUPPLIES …
 We are expecting to receive on-going deliveries of N95
masks, face shields, medical gowns, and additional
surgical masks beginning the week of April 20, which will
be allocated and delivered to provinces and territories.
 To date, the Government of Canada has ordered 11.2
million swabs. We are working with provinces and
territories to monitor and mitigate the impact of any
shortages.
 The Government of Canada, through the leadership of my
colleagues the Minister of Public Services and
Procurement Canada, and the Minister of Innovation,
Science and Industry, has galvanized Canadian industry to
increase domestic manufacturing capacity, including re-
tooling facilities to produce PPEs and medical equipment
and supplies, including ventilators and rapid testing kits.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ADDRESSING THE
EXPEDITED DELIVERIES OF PPE SUPPLIES TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES…
 The Government of Canada awarded a contract to
Amazon to manage the logistics of distributing PPE and
supplies to support the COVID-19 response.
 Amazon is working directly with Canada Post to provide
warehousing, and Purolator, to deliver the products to
provincial and territorial health authorities, across the
country, for the frontline healthcare response.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ENSURING THE QUALITY
OF PPE SUPPLIES …
 The safety of our healthcare providers is critical not only to
their health, but to mitigating the spread of COVID-19.
 PPEs and medical supplies received by the Government of
Canada, whether procured or donated, are verified by
PHAC as meeting the safety specifications for COVID-19
prior to distribution to provinces and territories.
 For example, N95 masks undergo visual inspection to
verify for defects in design and construction, and are
tested to assess flow rate, pressure drop and penetration.
Surgical masks undergo a fluid resistance and a breathing
resistance test.
 Supplies that do not meet specifications are subsequently
assessed, including determining their potential for use in
non-healthcare settings.
IF PRESSED ON THE MANAGEMENT OF THE NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATGEIC
STOCKPILE …
 Canada's NESS contains supplies that provinces and
territories can request in emergencies when their own
resources are insufficient, such as during infectious
disease outbreaks, natural disasters and other public
health events.
 In addition to PPEs and ventilators, the NESS inventory
includes medication and vaccines that require controlled
environmental conditions.
 In 2013, following an independent assessment of the
federal warehouse network, the NESS moved from nine
locations across Canada to six locations to offer the most
efficient distribution system without sacrificing response
capacity.
 The Government of Canada has committed to continue to
review how it manages its NESS, including ways to
optimize product life cycle management.
1.B - PPE guidance for frontline workers
 The Government of Canada recognizes the dedication and
commitment shown by our frontline health care workers in
this unprecedented time.
 Protecting these frontline workers, who are often caring for
the most vulnerable members of our society, remains a
priority of this government.
 Protection of frontline workers is a responsibility that is
shared across governments and employers.
 The Government is actively engaged with organizations
such as the WHO in evaluating the latest science on how
to most effectively and responsibly employ personal
protective equipment.
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking the
necessary action to continue to protect the health and
safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON PPE GUIDANCE FOR FRONTLINE WORKERS …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is developing
additional guidance that will take into account the latest
scientific evidence in order to ensure that our frontline
workers are protected.
 For example, upcoming guidance on keeping Home Care
workers and their clients safe will reflect the best scientific
evidence that is available.
 Recognizing that the amount of evidence on COVID-19
increases everyday, the Public Health Agency of Canada
is putting in place ways to update guidance, more quickly
to ensure that frontline worker have access to the most up-
to-date ways to stay safe.
 You can be assured that protecting frontline worker’s, and
the people they care for, is the single goal of this
government and this guidance is developed in pursuit of
that single goal.
1.C - Guidance for general public on use of non-medical
masks
 We know that staying home, physical distancing, hand
hygiene and coughing or sneezing into your arm or sleeve
are the most effective ways to prevent transmission of the
COVID-19 virus.
 Wearing a non-medical mask or face covering when you
cannot maintain a 2 meter physical distance from others, is
an additional measure you can take to prevent further
transmission of the virus to those around you.
 The Public Agency of Canada has developed guidance for
Canadians on how to construct and wear non-medical
masks and face coverings, as well as how they can be
used in the community and workplace settings.
 It is important to recognize that wearing a non-medical
mask or face covering does not protect the person wearing
it, but can prevent them from unknowingly spreading the
virus to others.
 Wearing a non-medical mask does not mean you can back
off the public health measures that we know work to
protect you; no mask will ever replace physical distancing.
IF PRESSED ON USE ON NON-MEDICAL MASKS FOR HEALTHCARE WORKERS…
 Healthcare workers need medical masks, including
surgical, medical procedure masks and respirators such as
N95 masks. It is extremely important that we keep the
supply of medical masks for healthcare workers where it is
urgently needed for medical procedures and to care for
individuals who have COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON WHY POSITION ON MASK USE BY THE GENERAL PUBLIC HAS
CHANGED…
 Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 has
been changing as the evidence base and our
understanding of COVID-19 evolves. We are continually
looking at the evidence as it is being produced and
working with our partners across the country and around
the world to learn more.
 With the emerging information on pre-symptomatic and
asymptomatic transmission, and our goal to stop the
spread of COVID-19 by all means possible, wearing a non-
medical mask is an additional measure we can take to
protect others, particularly when physical distancing is not
possible in public settings (e.g., grocery shopping, in close
settings such as public transit).
2.A National Volunteer Recruitment Campaign
 As part of the comprehensive federal, provincial and
territorial response to COVID-19, the Government of
Canada is supporting provinces and territories by
facilitating an inventory for recruitment and mobilization
of skilled Canadians to provide surge capacity in the
following key areas:
1. Case tracking and contact tracing;
2. Health system surge capacity; and
3. Case data collection and reporting.
 As of April 18, there were 36,899 volunteers registered
in the inventory from which provincial and territorial
governments can draw upon as needed.
 To date, referrals from the inventory have been shared
with a number of jurisdictions, mostly to support LTC
needs:
o 919 volunteers referred to Nova Scotia
o 1,118 volunteers referred to Quebec
o 24 volunteers referred to Northwest Territories
o Saskatchewan and Ontario are also in the process
of seeking referrals
 As needs evolve, support in other areas requiring
assistance may be provided.
2.B New portal offers easy access to mental health and
substance use supports to Canadians
 The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19
is creating stress and anxiety for many Canadians,
particularly those who do not have ready access to their
regular support networks. That is why the Government
has launched a new online portal that provides access
to a virtual network of psycho-social supports.
 This new portal, called Wellness Together Canada,
provides 24/7 access to free evidence-based tools and
resources for Canadians in all provinces and territories
to help meet their needs for mental health and
substance use supports.
 Wellness Together Canada makes it easy for
Canadians to access self-directed tools and find
credible information on mental health and substance
use issues. The portal also connects Canadians to peer
support workers, social workers, psychologists and
other professionals for confidential chat sessions or
phone calls.
 These supports will complement, and not replace,
existing provincial and territorial services.
 Use of the portal will be closely monitored to ensure
that the information and services it provides is aligned
with the needs of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH PORTFOLIO’S ACTIONS TO ADDRESS IMPACT OF COVID-
19 ON CANADIANS’ MENTAL HEALTH…
 The government has published guidance material to help
the public take care of their mental health. We are also
providing $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to respond to
the increased demand for counselling services for
children and youth.
 The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is currently
supporting 99 research projects on COVID-19, including
nine projects studying the mental health impact of the
current pandemic ($3.4 million from CIHR and partners).
These important projects will look at mental health during
and after the pandemic and will generate new evidence
to combat misinformation, stigma and fear. They will help
inform policy making and offer new evidence-based
treatments and services to all Canadians.
 Statistics Canada launched a survey of Canadians
related to COVID-19; Wave 2 of this survey will include
more questions on mental health and results will be
available in May.
 Taken together these efforts will help ensure vulnerable
Canadians have access to the health services they need
during the serious health threat posed by COVID-19.
2.C Hospital/Health Care System Impacts
 As a result of the unprecedented efforts taken so far to
practice physical distancing and to free up hospital
capacity, Canada’s health care systems have not been
overwhelmed by COVID-19 as was initially feared.
 I am proud of how our health care systems and
providers have worked together to handle the needs of
patients with COVID-19.
 But that’s not to say our systems haven’t been
challenged. I continue to be concerned about the long-
term care sector, particularly in Quebec and Ontario
where we have seen significant outbreaks.
 More needs to be done to bolster capacity in that sector,
but I am encouraged by the steps that been taken so far,
including shifting health care workers from other settings
into long-term care facilities.
IF PRESSED on how modelling is helping to inform
decisions about health system capacity…
 Governments continue to work collaboratively to model
demands on health systems under different modelling
scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national
level with support from the Canadian Institute of Health
Information.
 While we are eager to restore normal health care
operations, we will also need to maintain sufficient surge
capacity to meet the subsequent waves of infection we
unfortunately expect to see until a vaccine is available.
IF PRESSED on whether we will have enough capacity…
 At this time, provinces and territories have indicated that
they have sufficient health system capacity to address
COVID-19 for their epidemic control scenarios.
 But we know too that in our worst case scenario models,
our systems would be severely stressed, despite efforts
to put in place extra capacity.
 That is why governments are now thinking very carefully
about how best to de-escalate public health restrictions
in a way that will avoid future spikes in demand for
health services as we live with COVID-19 in the new
normal.
Background
 A committee of federal/provincial/territorial Deputy
Ministers of Health is meeting regularly to assess health
care capacity and support governments in their efforts to
expand available capacity.
 This joint work builds on the work provinces and
territories are already doing to put into action the
pandemic plans and procedures they prepared for use in
times like this, based on international experiences and
guidance. Provinces and territories have taken a range
of actions to increase system capacity and meet
projected needs. This includes cancelling elective
surgeries, physically reconfiguring spaces to fit more
beds and create more isolation areas, and transferring
patients who no longer need to be in hospital to other
settings.
 Many provinces have also increased use of publicly
funded virtual care services and online screening
assessments. This is reducing pressure on emergency
departments and is also complementing physical
distancing measures. Provinces and territories are also
running training exercises and simulations, and are
hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
 At the same time, because the surge of COVID-19
cases has been lower than predicted by provinces to
date, there is currently significant capacity sitting idle.
Once the services cancelled to free up extra capacity
are reintroduced into the system – like elective surgeries
– addressing pent up demand for those services will
pose its own challenges for system capacity.
Governments are working collaboratively to determine
when and how best to ease restrictions in a way that will
best balance the needs of COVID-19 and non-COVID-
19 patients.
2.D Health human resources - increasing surge capacity
to respond to COVID-19
 The Government of Canada is committed to working
with provinces and territories and taking the necessary
actions to protect the health and safety of Canadians
during this pandemic.
 Provinces and territories determine the specific roles
needed to support the COVID-19 response in their
jurisdictions.
 As part of a comprehensive response to COVID-19, the
Government of Canada is supporting the provinces and
territories by creating a virtual inventory for the
recruitment and mobilization of skilled Canadians to
provide surge capacity in key areas.
 We can be proud of the spirited response Canadians
have made to this call. As of April 18, there were more
than 36,000 volunteers registered in the inventory which
provincial and territorial governments can draw upon.
 So far, over 2,000 referrals from the inventory have been
shared with jurisdictions to support surge capacity
requirements, which have primarily included support to
long-term care facilities and contact tracing.
 Surge capacity pressures identified by provinces and
territories will evolve as the pandemic continues. The
federal government will continue to support them by
facilitating the identification of needed resources to help
meet those needs.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT WILL BE DONE TO PROTECT THE HEALTH AND SAFETY OF
NEW RECRUITS…
 We all need do our part to help stop the spread of the
virus among the residents of long-term care facilities, as
well as the workers who care for them.
 Canada is working to rapidly allocate PPE and medical
supplies to the provinces and territories as per an
approach agreed upon by federal-provincial-territorial
(FPT) Ministers of Health.
 We are aware of shortages of some personal protective
equipment (PPE) across Canada and are committed to
doing what is necessary to protect the health of
Canadians, especially frontline healthcare workers, from
COVID-19.
3.A Drug Shortages – Committee of the Whole
April 20, 2020
 The COVID-19 pandemic is having a major impact on
Canadians and our health care system.
 Our government is taking proactive measures to mitigate
the impact of any drug or medical device shortages
related to COVID-19 on Canadians. We are doing this in
collaboration with provinces and territories, industry, and
other healthcare partners.
 Through this work, we have been able to secure
additional supplies of needed drugs and medical devices
for Canada. For example, we have worked with multiple
companies to facilitate access to additional supplies of
drugs such as muscle relaxants (e.g. cisatracurium),
inhalers (e.g. salbutamol) and sedatives (e.g. propofol)
to help support COVID-19 patients.
 We have expedited the issuance of over 550 medical
device establishment licences related to the importation
and manufacturing of PPE such as masks and gowns.
 We have increased cooperation with international
regulatory partners (US, EU, UK, Australia), which has
resulted in earlier risk identification and response
planning for new shortages.
 We are working with key federal partners –like Global
Affairs Canada, Innovation, Science and Economic
Development and Public Services and Procurement
Canada – to increase access to needed drugs.
 For example, Health Canada is working with Public
Services and Procurement Canada to develop Requests
for Information for critical drugs that are in high demand
or are reported to be in shortage. We are asking
companies to indicate if they have access to additional
supplies of critical drugs to stabilize and build Canada’s
supply of these drugs, such that they can be secured for
Canada.
 These efforts will help ensure Canadians have access to
the drugs and medical devices they need during the
serious health threat posed by COVID-19 – now and as
the situation continues to evolve.
 We also continue to monitor the drug supply chain
beyond shortages of drugs used to support patients with
COVID-19 and will take action to try to prevent or
mitigate those shortages.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ACTIONS TO ADDRESS COVID-19
RELATED SHORTAGES …
 Health Canada is actively monitoring the supply of drugs
on the Canadian market and has implemented new,
more agile processes to help ensure Canadians have
access to the drugs they need.
 I authorized an Interim Order on March 30 to help
prevent and alleviate shortages related to COVID-19.
This Order permits the exceptional importation and sale
of drugs, medical devices, and foods for a special
dietary purpose that may not fully meet Canadian
requirements related to licensing and labelling, but are
manufactured according to comparable standards.
Companies must notify Health Canada five days in
advance of importation.
 Health Canada has also taken action to facilitate
expedited access to hand sanitizers and disinfectants to
help Canadians and health care workers access
products that limit the spread of COVID-19. As of April
17, over 226 products have already qualified for
immediate import and sale.
 In addition, Health Canada has expedited the
authorization of 33 disinfectants, 1,051 hand sanitizers
and 684 site licences by reducing service standards to
as little as 24 hours.
 In collaboration with industry, provinces and territories,
and other healthcare partners, we will continue to work
to mitigate the impact of shortages related to COVID-19
on Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE INTERIM ORDER TO PREVENT OR ALLEVIATE
SHORTAGES RELATED TO COVID-19 …
 The Interim Order I authorized on March 30 set up a
regulatory framework to help prevent and alleviate
shortages of drugs, medical devices, and foods for a
special dietary purpose.
 It allows for the exceptional importation and sale of
products that may not fully meet Canadian requirements
related to licensing and labelling, but are manufactured
according to comparable standards.
 Health Canada designates the products eligible for
importation and sale under the Interim Order.
Companies with an establishment licence may import
these drugs and devices after notifying Health Canada
five days in advance.
 As of April 17, there are 14 drugs permitted to be
imported and sold under the Interim Order. These drugs
include sedatives and muscle relaxants, such as
Propofol, Midazolam, and Ketamine, used in the
treatment of symptoms in patients with COVID-19.
 Health Canada has also designated 14 medical devices
permitted for exceptional importation, including masks,
N95 respirators and ventilators.
 Other products permitted to be imported and sold under
this measure include antibiotics, pain killers, masks and
gowns. More products will continue to be added to help
address shortages of critical supplies in Canada.
 The Interim Order also requires that any shortages of
critical medical devices, such as ventilators, be reported
to Health Canada and publicly communicated. Public
reporting of shortages help manufacturers and the
health care system plan and react to supply disruptions,
in order to mitigate the impact on patients.
 These new tools allow Health Canada to address critical
supply issues in an expedited manner when shortages
occur and help protect the health and safety of
Canadians during the pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON THE REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION FOR CRITICAL
DRUGS …
 Health Canada is taking action to stabilize the regular
supply of critical drugs Canada and to develop a safety
net for future supply.
 We are working with Public Services and Procurement
Canada to develop Requests for Information (RFI) for
these critical drugs that are in high demand or reported
to be in shortage. We are asking companies to indicate if
they have access to additional supplies of critical drugs.
 The RFIs will be used to identify additional supply that
has not already been earmarked to meet Canada’s
current needs. We are not looking for information on
products already identified to mitigate the shortage, but
new products to bolster the overall supply.
 The initial “wave” of RFIs will focus on Salbutamol,
Cisatracurium, Fentanyl for injection and Propofol. The
RFIs indicate that the Government of Canada is
interested in procuring up to a twelve-month supply at
the elevated demand levels which could be acquired
incrementally.
 Following this initial four, we plan to issue additional
RFIs for other critical drugs in shortage and drugs that
are showing promise in clinical trials as potential COVID-
19 treatments.
IF PRESSED ON ENGAGEMENT WITH PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
…
 Drug shortage management requires a multi-stakeholder
effort.
 Over the last number of years, capacity has been built
up across governments leading to a more coordinated
and effective approach to dealing with shortages.
 We have strengthened existing mechanisms in place to
manage drug shortages, including FPT infrastructure to
identify, report, and assess shortages in cooperation
with industry and patient groups.
 Health Canada has leveraged this FPT infrastructure
and increased cooperation with our provincial and
territorial partners to identify shortage signals earlier,
especially for critical drugs required for COVID-19.
 We are taking action with our partners to mitigate the
impact of any shortages related to COVID-19 on
Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN CHALLENGES DURING THE
COVID-19 PANDEMIC …
 COVID-19 is clearly putting pressure on the global drug
supply chain. There are currently four areas of concern.
 First, export restrictions and/or bans continue to be a
challenge. While some of the earlier restrictions have
been lifted (particularly in India), some remain in place.
 Second, manufacturing slowdowns were seen earlier
in the pandemic in both India and China. While there
have been positive signs lately with foreign production
levels beginning to rise, we are keeping a close eye on
this.
 Third, transportation/logistical constraints are leading
to delays in getting product to Canada.
 Fourth, increased demand is also creating pressure on
the system. Countries from around the world are now
competing for limited supplies of drugs.
 All impacted departments are working together to
address these challenges and find ways to secure
needed drugs for Canadians during the pandemic.
 We also remain mindful of other drugs that Canadians
depend on and continue to monitor supply of those as
well.
3.B Drugs and Devices
KEY MESSAGES
 The COVID-19 pandemic is unlike anything we have
seen in recent history. Health Canada is working
urgently to fight this virus and ensure the safety of
Canadians.
 Health Canada plays a vital role in the Government’s
COVID-19 response. To that end, Health Canada is
working with a sense of urgency and is proactively doing
all it can to respond to the pandemic in its role as health
product regulator.
 As the virus continues to spread in our communities, it is
very important to get drugs and medical supplies quickly
to the frontlines.
 Health Canada is focused on expediting the review and
approval of drugs and devices to address COVID-19,
while continuing to ensure that these products are safe
and effective for Canadians.
 On March 18, I approved an Interim Order to expedite
the review of medical device regulatory applications,
including test kits. An interim order is one of the fastest
mechanisms available to address large-scale public
health emergencies.
 So far, 71 medical devices have been authorized,
including diagnostic devices, personal protective
equipment, ventilators, and others.
 In addition to this streamlined application and review
process for medical devices, we are making sure that
important COVID-19 related information is available on
our website, including lists of authorized health products.
 I also authorized an Interim Order on March 30 to help
prevent and alleviate shortages. It permits the import
and sale of drugs, medical devices, and foods for a
special dietary purpose that that may not fully meet
Canadian requirements related to licensing and
labelling, but are manufactured according to comparable
standards.
 Health Canada has also taken action to facilitate
expedited access to hand sanitizers and disinfectants to
help Canadians and health care workers access
products that limit the spread of COVID-19 Health
Canada has also taken action to facilitate expedited
access to hand sanitizers and disinfectants.
 In addition, over 1,000 hand sanitizers and 33
disinfectants have been authorized through expedited
service standards that approve products in as little as 24
hours.
 Another key element of the Government’s response to
COVID-19 is ensuring we have the legislative authorities
and tools we need to take appropriate action to protect
the health and safety of Canadians.
 The Government of Canada welcomed the passage of
amendments to the Food and Drugs Act and the Patent
Act on March 25 that will streamline processes and
provide the Government with additional powers.
 The amendments will:
o help prevent and alleviate shortages of drugs and
medical devices;
o seek additional information from companies about
their products and activities to, for example, confirm
that products are safe for Canadians or to assess
the impact of a shortage; and
o make, use, or sell a patented invention, such as a
medication, that is needed to respond to this
pandemic.
 Interim measures are also improving access to products
that are approved or registered in other jurisdictions with
similar regulatory frameworks and quality assurances,
but may not fully meet some of the regulatory
requirements under the Food and Drugs Act — such as
packaging requirements.
 Health Canada is working closely with stakeholders in
other sectors of our economy, many of which are scaling
up or re-tooling their manufacturing capacity to provide
much needed tests or medical supplies. We are taking a
whole-of-government approach to mobilize industry,
providing them with information and support for
research, market approval, manufacturing and supply.
 Finally, Canadian researchers are also contributing to
clinical trials for treatments of COVID-19. As of April 18,
there are 18 trials ongoing in Canada.
 The health and safety of Canadians remains the top
priority and Health Canada will continue to use all tools
at its disposal to expedite the supply of safe and
effective health products to manage this situation and
adapt quickly.
IF PRESSED …
Clinical Trials
 Health Canada is facilitating clinical trials related to
COVID-19 in Canada. Clinical trials are conducted to
determine whether new drugs, diagnostics or treatments
are both safe and effective in human beings. Clinical
trials ensure the quality of the study product, protection
of the patient, and the proper collection and retention of
outcomes. At the same time, clinical trials provide
access to trial volunteers before new drugs, diagnostics
or treatments are approved.
 Several existing drugs have been repurposed to assess
their potential in treating or preventing COVID-19, while
other new drugs are under development. Since no drug
treatments have been proven safe and efficacious for
COVID-19, Health Canada recommends that any
treatments be investigated in clinical trials.
 Clinical trial applications will be reviewed and approved
by Health Canada in under 15 days. To date, Health
Canada has authorized 18 clinical trials for treatments
targeting COVID-19, most of which are repurposing
existing drugs.
 Health Canada is also closely monitoring vaccine
development and is in active discussions with several
vaccine manufacturers and researchers to provide
regulatory advice for vaccine trials that may launch in
Canada.
 Until a vaccine or drug is available on the Canadian
market, another option for access is Health Canada's
Special Access Program. This Program is available to
practitioners requiring access to drugs that provide
supportive treatments to the infection. Our goal is to
ensure that Canada is prepared for whatever challenges
come our way.
 The Special Access Program has authorized access to
an experimental drug for the treatment of 11 seriously ill
patients infected with COVID-19.
Medical Devices
 Health Canada designates the products eligible for
importation and sale under the Interim Order.
Companies with an establishment licence may import
these drugs and devices after notifying Health Canada
five days in advance.
 As of April 17, there are 14 drugs permitted to be
imported and sold under the Interim Order. These drugs
include sedatives and muscle relaxants, such as
Propofol, Midazolam, and Ketamine, used in the
treatment of symptoms in patients with COVID-19.
 Health Canada has also designated 14 medical devices
permitted for exceptional importation, including masks,
N95 respirators and a ventilator.
 To date, we have authorized a total of 71 COVID-19
medical devices, including:
o 13 diagnostic testing devices
o 46 personal protective equipment devices (gloves,
gowns and medical and non-medical masks)
o 4 decontamination devices for N95 respirators
o 3 ventilatory management devices
o 1 artificial intelligence diagnostic software
Hand Sanitizers and Disinfectants
 Because of current supply shortages of pharmaceutical
and food-grade ethanol, Health Canada has temporarily
authorized the use of certain sources of technical-grade
ethanol in hand sanitizer products.
 Each source of technical-grade ethanol must undergo a
case-by-case risk assessment. I If approved, products
must meet specific conditions such as providing
additional information on their product labels to support
their safe use. Manufacturers are also required to
provide distribution information to Health Canada to
assist with supply chain monitoring. As soon as the
supply of higher grade ethanol returns to a sufficient
level, these approvals will cease to be in effect
International Collaboration
 Health Canada is leveraging its strong international
partnerships with: the US Food and Drug Administration;
the European Medicines Agency; the International
Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities; the World
Health Organization; the Pan-American Health
Organization and the Australia, Canada, Singapore,
Switzerland Consortium. We are collaborating with
member countries to share information and to raise our
collective level of awareness of evidence-based
approaches for vaccines and treatments. The objective
is to work towards alignment on regulatory requirements.
 Health Canada, through the International Coalition of
Medicines Regulatory Authorities, known as ICMRA, is
participating in COVID-19 specific discussions, is
collaborating with member countries to share information
and to raise our collective level of awareness of
evidence-based approaches for vaccines and
treatments. The objective is to work towards alignment
on regulatory requirements. We are in discussions
regarding the treatments and vaccines that are under
development or testing in clinical trials in our respective
countries.
Stakeholder Engagement
 Health Canada recognizes that many stakeholders,
health professionals and Canadians are looking for more
information about health products for COVID-19.. We
have consolidated Health Canada information into a new
website for the health product industry, so they know
how to apply for regulatory approval and who to contact
for questions. We are also making sure information
relevant to health professionals and Canadians is
provided on the COVID-19 website.
 Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in
the health product industry to proactively identify, track
and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials,
potential diagnostic tests, treatments and vaccines
related to COVID-19.
3.C Claims to prevent/treat COVID
 Health Canada has not authorized any product to
prevent, treat or cure COVID-19. Selling unauthorized
health products or authorized products that make false
or misleading claims to prevent, treat or cure COVID-19
is illegal in Canada. Our Government takes this matter
very seriously and is taking action to stop this illegal
activity.
 As a result of proactive monitoring activities and
complaints received, a wide range of products that are
either unauthorized, or authorized but make false or
misleading claims related to COVID-19, have been
identified. Health Canada has issued compliance letters
to multiple companies directing them to immediately stop
selling such products and remove references to these
products from their websites.
 Our Government takes this issue seriously and will not
hesitate to use all mechanisms and tools at its disposal
to stop these activities.
 Health Canada is also coordinating with other
government agencies such as the Competition Bureau
to address the issue of false and misleading claims
related to COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ACTIONS TO DATE
 As of April 15, Health Canada has followed up on nearly
200 cases of health products making false or misleading
claims related to COVID-19 identified through proactive
monitoring activities or complaints received.
 Various compliance and enforcement options are
available to manage the risk posed to public health and
safety by false or misleading claims related to COVID-
19, including on site inspections, regulatory letters,
recalls, public communications or product seizures.
 In certain circumstances, when the regulatory
enforcement responses are not appropriate to achieve
compliance, Health Canada may also refer its findings to
the Public Prosecution Service of Canada for potential
prosecution.
3.D Ventilator Supply
 Our Government, in collaboration with our partners, is
supporting Canadian manufacturers in their efforts to
supply ventilators to the Canadian healthcare system.
 On March 30th, I signed an Interim Order to help prevent
and alleviate drug and medical device shortages. An
interim order is one of the fastest mechanisms available
to address large-scale public health emergencies.
 My Department has expedited the approval of over 550
medical device establishment licence applications
related to devices being manufactured, imported and
distributed to help combat COVID-19.
 These actions are showing results, with almost 150 new
medical devices authorized to help in the fight, including
a new model of ventilator, the Newport HT-50, that is
already being distributed by the Public Health Agency of
Canada.
If pressed on further measures…
 In addition to the streamlined application and review
process for medical devices, we are making sure, by
way of our website, that important COVID-19 related
information is available for Canadians, health care
providers, and manufacturers. We also maintain an up to
date list of authorized COVID-19 devices in Canada.
This is key to ensure the healthcare system is aware of
the medical devices that have been authorized and
ready for access.
If pressed on the March 30 interim order…
 The Interim Order permits the exceptional importation
and sale of drugs and medical devices such as
ventilators that may not fully meet Canadian
requirements related to licensing and labelling, but are
manufactured according to comparable standards.
 There are currently 14 medical devices permitted for
exceptional importation and sale under the Interim
Order, including one ventilator that is being distributed
by the Public Health Agency of Canada. Other products
permitted to be imported and sold under this measure
include masks and gowns and more products will
continue to be added to help increase supplies in
Canada.
 The Interim Order also requires that any shortages of
critical medical devices such as ventilators be reported
to Health Canada and publicly communicated. Public
reporting of shortages help manufacturers and the
health care system plan and react to supply disruptions,
in order to mitigate the impact on patients.
4.A Support for Indigenous and Northern communities
 As part of our response to COVID-19, the Government of
Canada is supporting First Nations and Inuit communities in
preparing for, monitoring and responding to the virus.
 On March 18, 2020, the Government of Canada announced
that it would provide $305 million for a new distinctions-based
Indigenous Community Support Fund, to address immediate
needs in First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities. These
funds will flow directly to Indigenous communities and groups
across the country in order to provide the flexibility needed to
prepare and react to the spread of COVID-19.
 The provision of health services to Indigenous peoples is an
area of shared jurisdiction, and the federal government, through
Indigenous Services Canada, supports health programs and
services for First Nations and Inuit that supplement those
provided by provinces and territories.
 ISC’s COVID-19 response efforts to date have focused on
working with communities and partners to respond to
immediate needs, while supporting pandemic preparedness
efforts across all areas.
 Strong engagement continues between ISC Regions and First
Nations and Inuit regional partners and communities to identify
and address risk factors and receive, track, and respond to
requests from communities and partners.
 The Government of Canada is working with provincial and
territorial public health laboratories to meet the demand for
testing, including the testing needs of Indigenous communities.
The Government of Canada is exploring a range of rapid test
kits, including the recently approved Spartan Bioscience’s rapid
testing kit, to improve testing capabilities in rural and remote
communities.
 We know that some Indigenous businesses are also facing
unique challenges, including being in rural or remote locations
and having less access to capital, and are disproportionately
affected by this unprecedented situation.
 On April 18 we announced $306.8 million to help small and
medium-sized Indigenous businesses, and to support
Aboriginal Financial Institutions that offer financing to these
businesses through short-term, interest-free loans and non-
repayable contributions. These measures will help 6,000
Indigenous-owned businesses get through these difficult times
.
 The Government is working through Public Safety’s
Government Operations Centre and ISC to coordinate a
response to COVID-19 in northern and isolated communities,
as well as prepare for the upcoming flood and fire season. We
are monitoring the status of communities across the country so
that any needs for assistance can be identified and offered
proactively.
 Our government has also been working with northern and
Indigenous partners to address the unique and critical needs of
Northerners. These supports will ensure that northern residents
have the supports they need to prepare for and respond to the
COVID-19 pandemic. From access to health services, to the
continuation of the supply chain through air supports, and
greater subsidies on essential items, we are taking actions to
help Northerners when they need it most.
 These measures include $72.6 million to the governments of
Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Nunavut to support their
COVID-19 health and social services preparations and
response. This funding will help territories address the critical
priorities they identified to minimize the spread of the virus.
4.B Intersection of CoVID-19 and substance use
 During the pandemic, we must not forget that many regions of
the country continue to struggle with historic rates of drug
overdose and harms.
 Tragically, in these communities, the pandemic is compounding
this deadly and ongoing public health crisis.
 The Government is very concerned that people who use drugs
are at increased risk of CoVID-19. This is due to risks that
come with multiple close contacts and unique difficulties of
social distancing; increased likelihood of underlying health
conditions; and increased risks of overdose when using drugs
alone.
 In response, the Government has taken important measures to
enable the health system to better meet the needs of people
with substance use disorder as a part of its response to the
pandemic. We have made it easier for them to access the
medications they need, such as those necessary for opioid
agonist treatment, like Suboxone and methadone.
 Ministerial exemptions issued under the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act now permit prescribers to use verbal
prescriptions to order narcotics, and pharmacists to extend and
transfer prescriptions to support ongoing treatment, as well as
have these medications delivered to patients.
 By providing for these new measures, vulnerable people will be
better able to get the supports they need, while respecting
public health directives for physical distancing and self-
isolation.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ACTIONS TO ADDRESS
COVID-19 IN COMMUNITIES WHERE THERE IS CHRONIC
OVERCROWDING, INCLUDING A SHORTAGE OF HOUSING …
 We understand the unique challenges associated with
containing the spread and protecting homeless Canadians from
CoVID-19.
 On April 6, we proactively took steps to make it easier for
overdose prevention sites to be rapidly established in
temporary community shelters for individuals exposed to
CoVID-19, and to allow existing supervised consumption site
operators to adjust their services to support physical distancing
and respect public health directives.
 These measures will not only make it easier for people who are
staying at shelters to respect public health directives to distance
and isolate, they will also protect them from the risks and harms
of overdose.
 Health Canada is also supporting community-based projects
funded under the Substance Use and Addictions Program in
order to allow for funds to be re-directed to support immediate
CoVID-19 needs in their communities.
 In addition, my department is working to identify additional
areas where federal exemptions, national guidelines or funding
opportunities could help mitigate the impacts of the dual public
health crises of CoVID-19 and opioid-related overdose and
death.
 Taken together these efforts will help ensure vulnerable
Canadians have access to the health services they need during
the serious health threat posed by COVID-19.
4.C - Long Term Care Guidance
 There are some populations such as residents of long term
care facilities who are especially vulnerable to acquiring
infection with COVID-19 due to behavioural factors, shared
spaces and underlying chronic conditions and age.
 Recognizing this, the Public Health Agency of Canada has
released infection prevention and control guidance to
assist long term care facilities prevent transmission of
COVID-19 to this at-risk population.
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking the
necessary action to continue to protect the health and
safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON LONG-TERM CARE GUIDANCE …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada’s guidance on
infection prevention and control in long term care facilities
is designed to limit the possibility of introducing COVID-19
into these facilities by recommending that only those who
are essential to the care of residents can enter the facility.
 In this guidance, staff in long term care facilities are
encouraged to take their own steps to protect the residents
by monitoring their health twice a day, following routine
infection control practises and wearing a mask for the
duration of their shifts.
 This guidance also recommends that staff restrict their
work to only one facility in order to prevent transmitting
COVID-19 between facilities.
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking the
necessary action to continue to protect the health and
safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL VOLUNTEER RECRUITMENT CAMPAIGN …
 As part of the comprehensive federal, provincial and
territorial response to COVID-19, the Government of
Canada is supporting provinces and territories by
facilitating an inventory for recruitment and mobilization of
skilled Canadians to provide surge capacity in the following
key areas:
4. Case tracking and contact tracing;
5. Health system surge capacity; and
6. Case data collection and reporting.
 As of April 18, there were 36,899 volunteers registered in
the inventory from which provincial and territorial
governments can draw upon as needed.
 To date, referrals from the inventory have been shared
with a number of jurisdictions, mostly to support LTC
needs:
o 919 volunteers referred to Nova Scotia
o 1,118 volunteers referred to Quebec
o 24 volunteers referred to Northwest Territories
o Saskatchewan and Ontario are also in the process of
seeking referrals
As needs evolve, support in other areas requiring assistance
may be provided.
4.D - Federal Correctional Facilities
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely
with Correctional Service Canada to strengthen measures
to prevent introduction and transmission of COVID-19 into
federal correctional institutions across Canada.
 Correctional Service Canada has been working in concert
with the Public Health Agency of Canada to identify
additional measures required to control the outbreak at
Mission and to prevent or contain outbreaks elsewhere.
 In the immediate term, the focus is on controlling the
outbreak at Mission Institution (medium unit which houses
306 inmates) by:
Mobilizing a field epidemiologist, an Infection Prevention
o
and Control expert, and a Workplace Health and Safety
person this past weekend [April 18] to review and audit
the practices around donning and doffing PPE
equipment, and cleaning and disinfecting practices; and
Prioritizing additional facilities for further assessments.
o
 The Public Health Agency of Canada’s National
Microbiology Laboratory has been working with the British
Columbia Centre for Disease Control to ensure that there
is sufficient laboratory testing capacity for Mission.
CSC and PHAC are also focusing on preventing and

containing the spread of the virus across institutions by:
Assessing and strengthening measures to prevent and
o
contain the transmission of the virus;
Reviewing and auditing the infection prevention and
o
control practices; and
Reviewing and auditing the workplace health and safety
o
practices.
Furthermore, Correctional Service Canada and the Public

Health Agency of Canada are working collaboratively to
strengthen the outbreak management and coordination at
both local and national levels by establishing Local and
National Outbreak Coordinating Committees, which will
include local and provincial/territorial public health
authorities, CSC and PHAC members.
Finally, Correctional Service Canada and the Public Health

Agency of Canada have worked together to address the
concerns expressed by BC’s Chief Medical Officer by:
Having experts deployed to Mission Institution to review
o
the institution’s practices around donning and doffing
masks and cleaning protocols;
Establishing protocols to complete detailed case report
o
forms;
Ensuring staff do not work at multiple sites;
o
Establishing a protocol to inform the provincial health
o
authority of inmates released; and
Establishing a protocol among CSC, CDC and Fraser
o
Health for the sharing of data on testing and its results.
 In addition, the Public Health Agency of Canada and
Correctional Service Canada are working with local and
provincial/ territorial public health authorities across the
country to ensure that all of the appropriate public health
and infection prevention and control practices are in place
to prevent or rapidly control further outbreaks.
 The National Microbiology Laboratory is working with BC
and other provincial public health laboratories to ensure
that federal correctional institutions have access to
sufficient laboratory testing capacity to rapidly identify and
manage cases.
IF PRESSED ON THE COVID-19 OUTBREAK AT MISSION …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely
with officials at Correctional Service Canada, as well as
with the public health authorities locally and with British
Columbia’s Centre for Disease Control, to bring the
outbreak at Mission under control.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is in daily contact
with Correctional Service Canada, and have mobilized
experts in epidemiology, infection prevention and control,
and workplace health and safety to Mission to support
Correctional Services Canada and local public health
authorities in bringing the outbreak under control.
5.A Test Kit Approvals
Key Messages
 Only diagnostic tests authorized by Health Canada can
be imported or sold in Canada.
 On March 18, 2020, I approved an interim order to
expedite the review of medical devices, including test
kits. An interim order is one of the fastest mechanisms
available to address large-scale public health
emergencies.
 Health Canada reviews all COVID-19-related
submissions and applications as quickly as possible
without compromising patient safety.
 Unauthorized tests may not produce accurate results,
leading to potential misdiagnosis.
 Health Canada has confirmed that authorized COVID-19
tests are well supported by evidence indicating they will
provide accurate and reliable results.
IF PRESSED
…
 Health Canada has received submissions for two types
of diagnostic testing devices:
– nucleic acid-based tests
– serological-based tests
 These technologies have different levels of reliability and
are used for different purposes.
 Nucleic acid amplification testing has proven to be a
reliable method to diagnose COVID-19 infection by
detecting the virus itself. Health Canada has authorized
13 nucleic acid tests as of April 17.
 Serologic tests detect antibodies developed against the
virus and could be useful in assessing the population
that contracted the disease. However, these are not
used for diagnosis. Lack of scientific evidence about the
immune response generated by SARS-CoV-2 limits the
ability to rely on these tests for now.
 To date Health Canada has not issued authorizations for
any serological tests.
 My department is working with leading regulators and
world-renowned national laboratories to identify
serological tests that will produce accurate and reliable
results.
 These efforts will help ensure Canada has access to the
testing devices needed during the serious health threat
posed by COVID-19.
5.B - Testing Capacity/PT Testing Strategy/Rapid Testing
 Public Health Agency of Canada is working with provinces
and territories to ensure that persons under investigation
for the novel coronavirus are confirmed or ruled out
through laboratory testing.
 National Microbiology Laboratory is working closely with
provincial and territorial public health laboratories to
increase testing capacity across the country ensuring a
steady supply of equipment for testing. National
Microbiology Laboratory are actively exploring other testing
options and approaches.
 To support rapid testing in rural, remote and Indigenous
communities, the Public Health Agency of Canada is
actively validating rapid test kits including Spartan
Bioservices approved on April 11. The Public Health
Agency of Canada will be working in collaboration with
provincial and territorial governments to procure and
determine the distribution of test kits to communities most
in need.
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking the
necessary action to continue to protect the health and
safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON RAPID TEST KITS …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has placed orders
from Spartan Biosciences to order 600 test instruments
and enough test kits to perform 1.92 million tests and is
working closely with provinces and territories to determine
the need of rural, remote, and Indigenous communities.
The Public Health Agency of Canada is also actively
looking at other instruments and platforms that could be
used to support testing in rural, remote, and Indigenous
communities.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER ALL CANADIANS SHOULD BE TESTED …
 Canada has and will continue to test symptomatic
individuals, as part of our evidence-based approach, while
considering the evolving science on other testing
scenarios. As the science evolves, our approach will keep
pace, and policies and protocols will be updated
accordingly.
 As new products or platforms become available and
approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories
to acquire new products and platforms to augment existing
testing capacity.
 These efforts will help ensure Canadians have access to
the testing they need during the serious health threat
posed by COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON SEROLOGY TESTING …
 The National Microbiology Laboratory is working on
developing a number of in-house serological tests in
addition to evaluating a variety of commercial tests for
COVID-19.
 Developing and applying a serological test for COVID-19
has its challenges as this is an emerging virus and the
performance of new tests require additional research. The
National Microbiology Laboratory, working with Health
Canada and other partners, is in the process of assessing
a number of serological tests and collecting samples to
evaluate them.
5.C - Procurement of Reagents
 Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with
provincial and territorial governments to monitor the supply
of reagents for laboratory testing purposes in Canada. We
are taking action with our partners to mitigate the impact of
any shortages related to COVID-19 for Canadians.
 For example, we were informed of shortages of reagents in
some jurisdictions. We are actively working with industry
partners to secure a steady supply of reagents for
laboratory testing purposes.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has put in a bulk
procurement of testing reagents on behalf of the P/Ts with
the aim to increase Canada’s allocation on the global
scale.
 The National Microbiology Lab developed a recipe to
produce a reagent within Canada to secure a steady
supply of reagents. The Public Health Agency of Canada
signed a contract with LuminUltra, a New Brunswick based
company, to produce reagents using the National
Microbiology Lab recipe for 500,000 tests a week for the
next year.
 This domestic supply of reagents from LuminUltra is
expected to exceed current testing demands in Canada.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to explore
other options and approaches to bolster the existing supply
chain and be prepared for future testing scenarios. These
efforts will help ensure Canadians have access to
laboratory testing they need during the serious health
threat posed by COVID-19.
6.A - Border Measures (COVID-19)
 The health and safety of Canadians is our top priority. We
are taking unprecedented action to respond to the COVID-
19 pandemic.
 Since February 3, the Public Health Agency of Canada has
enacted ten Emergency Orders under the Quarantine Act
to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada –
to reduce risks from other countries, to repatriate
Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the border to
reduce the impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has been working
with federal partners to facilitate commercial traffic to
maintain the flow of essential goods and services, while
continuing to protect the health of Canadians.
 In mid-March, we put in place a travel ban prohibiting
foreign nationals from entering into Canada, with some
exceptions, such as temporary foreign workers,
international students and medical professionals.
 At the end of March, we enacted an order requiring
mandatory isolation that required all travelers to isolate or
quarantine upon return. At that time, we differentiated
between symptomatic and asymptomatic travelers.
Symptomatic travelers were not permitted to isolate with
vulnerable persons, nor could they take public transport to
their place for isolation.
 As we learned more about the virus, and the fact that
people who are asymptomatic could transmit the virus, we
responded appropriately.
 On April 15, we enacted an order requiring mandatory
isolation for both symptomatic and asymptomatic travelers
arriving in Canada. Both symptomatic and asymptomatic
travelers are required to confirm that they have a suitable
place to isolate – a place with access to necessities where
they are not in contact with vulnerable people. In addition,
all travelers arriving in Canada must now wear a non-
medical mask or face covering while in transit to isolation
or quarantine.
 Those who do not have an appropriate place in which to
isolate or quarantine must go to a place designated by the
Chief Public Health Officer of Canada.
 Canada’s Chief Public Health Officer has designated
quarantine facilities (e.g., hotels) in a number of locations,
including in Vancouver, Calgary, Toronto and Montréal.
 Our border actions have been complementary to those
taken under the Aeronautics Act to require health
screening of travelers before boarding flights to Canada
and now all travelers are required to wear a non-medical
mask during travel or in airports.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with the
RCMP and provincial law enforcement agencies to verify
compliance with the Mandatory Isolation Order.
 Penalties include a fine of up to $750,000 or imprisonment
for six months, or both, for failure to comply with this
Order.
 A ticketing scheme is now in place to allow for fines for
non-compliance ranging from $275 to $1000.
If pressed on masks …
 Wearing an appropriate non-medical mask or face
covering can be useful for short periods to prevent
respiratory droplets from contaminating others or landing
on surfaces.
 An appropriate non-medical mask or face covering is made
of protective layers of absorbent fabric that fit snuggly over
the nose and mouth and is secured to the face with ties or
loops. Masks or coverings should allow for easy breathing,
stay the same shape after machine washing and drying
and be changed as soon as possible if damp or dirty.
If pressed on thermal scanners …
 In the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
outbreak in 2003, more than 6.5 million screening
transactions occurred at Canadian airports including
inbound and outbound travelers. Of these, 2.3 million
travelers were screened using thermal scanners.
 Despite this intensive screening effort, no cases of SARS
were detected using these methods.
If pressed on maximum penalties under the Quarantine Act …
 A person who causes a risk of imminent death or serious
bodily harm to another person while willfully or recklessly
contravening the Quarantine Act or the regulations could
be liable for a fine of up to $1 million or imprisonment of up
to three years, or both.
7.A - Serological Surveillance – Future Steps
 Managing Canada’s COVID-19 epidemic in the near and
medium term depends on knowing where the virus has
been and where it is going, who has been infected, and the
resulting levels of immunity in populations.
 Gathering this information through serological testing or
‘serosurveillance’ will help inform public health measures
such as vaccination and physical distancing as this
pandemic evolves.
 To support this important work:
o The Government of Canada is exploring the
development of a national serosurveillance program. It
will connect and leverage expertise nationally to
deliver a coordinated agenda for Canada to measure
the scope and scale of COVID-19 infection and rapidly
feed this information to decision-makers.
o These efforts will inform, and be informed by,
international serosurveillance efforts.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada’s National
Microbiology Laboratory will be a key collaborator in this
initiative, providing their scientific expertise in testing
standardization and serological tests.
IF PRESSED ON SEROLOGY, OR ON FUTURE ACTIONS ON SEROLOGICAL
SURVEILLANCE …
 A serological test is a blood test that detects the presence
of virus-specific antibodies in a patient’s blood. If the
antibody is detected, it means that the person has, at
some point, been infected with the virus that causes
COVID-19.
 Information from serological surveys can also help guide
important public health decisions for immunization
strategies once a vaccine becomes available.
 Developing, evaluating and applying a serological test for
COVID-19 has its challenges as this is an emerging virus.
Researchers at the National Microbiology Laboratory and
its partners are in the process of assessing a number of
serological tests and collecting samples to evaluate them.
IF THE FUNDING IS ANNOUNCED (INCLUDING THE CONSORITUM) …
 This Consortium will mobilize Canada’s top public health
professionals and scientists throughout the country in
coordinating a series of studies using blood tests that can
determine if an individual has been infected with COVID-
19.
 This will give us an excellent snapshot of the immunity
status in the general population and in vulnerable
populations such as Indigenous communities, and
residents of nursing homes and long-term care facilities.
 Sharing data from such a large-scale surveillance initiative
will allow Canadian and global researchers to work
together to develop innovative approaches for better
understanding of immunities and emerging aspects of
SARS-CoV-2. For example, Canada will play an important
contributing role in global COVID-focused initiatives such
as the World Health Organisation’s Solidarity II and Unity
studies.
8.A - Suspension of U.S. Contributions to the World Health
Organization (WHO)
 The WHO has been providing critical global and regional
leadership during these unprecedented times.
 Canada has valued WHO’s leadership and coordination on
many aspects of the COVID-19 response, including its
role:
o overseeing the International Health Regulations, the
foundational legal global public health instrument
designed to help prevent, protect against, control and
respond to the international spread of disease
o driving collaborative global research efforts towards new
vaccines and effective treatments
o working with all actors to address shortages of critical
medical supplies and personal protective equipment,
and
o supporting the most vulnerable countries in their
preparedness and response efforts.
 We have confidence that the WHO bases their guidance
and recommendations on the best available science and
evidence, which has been rapidly evolving in the current
context.
 For example, the WHO has helped to build a common
understanding of this new disease based on science and
research, and helped keep our front-line workers safe
through guidance on the proper use of personal protective
equipment during COVID-19.
 We understand that the U.S. has taken a decision to
temporarily suspend their funding to WHO while the
Administration conducts a review of the organization’s
response to COVID-19.
 We agree that all have lessons to be learned. We continue
to have trust that our multilateral institutions are working
with all countries, for all countries.
 Canada has and will continue to be a strong supporter of
the WHO. Since February 11, our government has
provided $15.5 million to WHO, and a further $1.5 million
to Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the regional
WHO office for the Americas, to prepare and respond to
COVID-19 events.
 Our continued commitment to the WHO includes our
interest in making it a strong, accountable, and well-
governed institution. We will continue to participate in
oversight and accountability processes to help reinforce
transparency, confidence, and trust in the organization.
 This includes after-action reviews, which will be important
at all levels following this crisis and can provide critical
insights to support necessary change.
 We have seen how important these reviews can be. For
example, a review process following the Ebola outbreak in
West Africa in 2014 led to important and meaningful
reforms of WHO’s emergency program, which Canada
strongly supported.
 However, we remain in the midst of the
pandemic. Undermining the WHO right now will not
strengthen our response, and risks damaging the general
public’s trust in WHO’s evidence-based guidance when it
is needed more than ever.
 Now is not the appropriate time to draw resources and
focus away from where they are needed most: the health
and safety of Canadians and people around the world.
Background
 On April 14, President Donald Trump announced that the
U.S. will temporarily suspend funding to World Health
Organization (WHO) for 60-90 days while the
Administration conducts a review of the organization, due
to misgivings over the WHO’s management of the
pandemic and a perceived bias towards China.
 The Trump Administration has long been skeptical towards
the United Nations system and multilateralism more
broadly.
 The U.S. is the top Member State contributor to the WHO,
contributing approximately 15% of the organization’s
funding. The WHO is assessing of how this funding
suspension will affect its work.
8.B. G7 and G20
 Canada has engaged with its international counterparts
through various means since the beginning of COVID-19
pandemic. With the outbreak evolving rapidly around the
world, we must work closely with our international partners
to help reduce risks to Canadians and the global
community.
 Since early February, I have been engaging my G7
counterparts on a weekly basis to share information on
public health measures and identify possible joint actions
to tackle this outbreak.
 Canada’s regular exchange with its G7 allies – some of
who are ahead of us in terms of epidemiological curve –
has allowed us to learn from others’ experiences and best
practices, which continue to help inform our domestic
response. For example, Canada’s sterilization plan on
personal protective equipment has been adapted from
lessons learned from the United States.
 Just yesterday, I also participated in the G20 Health
Ministers Meeting to discuss the COVID-19 pandemic,
among other health priorities. As the G20, we shared
national best practices and exchanged views on the
importance of multilateral collaboration through the World
Health Organization, as well as other institutions such as
the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations, and
the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations.
 Prime Minister Trudeau and my cabinet colleagues are
also engaged with their G7 and G20 counterparts. We
remain committed to advancing a whole-of-government
and multi-sectoral response to COVID-19.
 We are committed to continue to work closely with our
international partners, both within the G7, the G20 and
beyond, to protect the health and safety of Canadians and
around the world.
9.A - Communications for Canadians – websites, phone
lines, digital tools and apps
 Since the start of the COVID-19 outbreak, the Government
of Canada has provided Canadians and health care
providers with the timely, trusted, accessible and evidence-
based information they need to protect themselves, their
families, their communities and their businesses.
 We have used a wide variety of channels to provide
information and updates to Canadians, including through:
o the dedicated website Canada.ca/coronavirus, which
has had more than 100 million visits since its launch,
o daily briefings to the media,
o a toll-free information line [1-833-784-4397] with
service available in 200+ languages, social media
and digital advertising.
 We are using a variety of methods to ensure that
Canadians who may not have access to or use online
technology, or who live in rural or remote communities, get
the information they need so they can make informed
decisions and protect their health. For example, we
distributed a nation-wide mail-out on COVID-19 to every
household in Canada.
 Over the past month, you would have likely seen, heard or
read a Government of Canada ad on TV or radio, or in
print publications across the country.
 Through our website, Canadians can access:
o plain-language guidance and advice for travellers,
healthcare professionals, essential workers,
Indigenous communities and all Canadians
o downloadable factsheets and infographics on a
variety of topics, in multiple languages;
o a self-assessment tool to check for symptoms of
COVID-19; and
o a dashboard that shows how the outbreak of COVID-
19 is evolving in Canada.
 To complement the website, the Government of Canada
launched the Canada COVID-19 mobile app, which
provides users with easy access to trusted health
resources and allows them to track COVID-19 symptoms
daily.
 The Government of Canada has also launched Wellness
Together Canada, a mental health and substance use
support portal to provide access to credible information
and to connect Canadians to peer support workers, social
workers, psychologists and other professionals for
confidential chat sessions or phone calls.
 The Government of Canada continues to work closely with
provinces and territories, vendors and stakeholders to
make additional tools widely available to Canadians and
their families.
If pressed on the Wellness Together Canada portal…
 During these difficult times, it is critical that Canadians
have access to effective tools to support their mental
health and well-being, obtain credible and reliable
information about mental health and substance use, and
access services.
 The Wellness Together Canada portal provides Canadians
with access to a virtual network of psycho-social
information services and supports.
If pressed on the Canada COVID-19 app…
 This app has more than 425,000 users as of April 17. It
builds on what provinces and territories are doing, and
provides another valuable resource for Canadians.
 The Canada COVID-19 app is a central resource to access
trusted, evidence-based information about the COVID-19
pandemic across Canada. It does not track personal
information, nor is it a surveillance tool.
 The protection of Canadians’ information is a priority for the
Government of Canada, and any tool used to collect health
care information undergoes a rigorous privacy assessment.
10.A. Vaccine Research
 Vaccine research and development is a highly complex
and long process that typically takes over 10 years.
 Globally, there are over 100 COVID-19 candidate vaccines
at different stages of development by academia and
industry.
 In Canada, there are 10 candidate vaccines in early
development and it is anticipated that several will advance
to human clinical trials in the coming months.
 The Government of Canada is committed to supporting
multiple candidate vaccines to increase the likelihood of
success.
IF PRESSED ON MCM ACTION PLAN …
 The Government of Canada has committed over $275
million in funding to support COVID-19 vaccine and
therapeutics research and development.
 For example, investments have been made in vaccine
development efforts by Quebec-based Medicago and
Saskatchewan-based VIDO-Intervac.
 We are working closely with academia and the private
sector to advance research and development of candidate
vaccines by partnering on pre-clinical research, bio-
manufacturing requirements to support large-scale
production, enhancing capacity and access for clinical
trials, and seeking solutions for domestic capacity.
10.B - Timelines for Vaccine Development
 Generally, it can take 10 to 20 years to develop a vaccine
due to the extensive research required to ensure a safe
and effective product.
 There are over 100 vaccine candidates globally that are at
different stages of development by academia, small and
medium enterprise and large, and multinational
pharmaceutical organizations.
 Of these, six have demonstrated promise and have
advanced to Phase 1 clinical trials in China, the US, and
the UK. Early results of Phase 1 clinical trials are expected
as early as July 2020.
 In Canada, there are 10 candidate vaccines in early
development and it is expected that several will advance to
clinical trials in the coming months.
 The Government of Canada is supporting multiple
organizations, who are working at unprecedented speed to
develop candidate vaccines.
 Health Canada is reviewing its regulatory pathways to help
expedite access to safe and effective vaccine.
IF PRESSED ON TIMELINES FOR VACCINE DEVELOPMENT …
 The Government of Canada has committed over $275
million in funding to support COVID-19 vaccine and
therapeutics research and development.
 For example, investments have been made in vaccine
development efforts by Quebec-based Medicago and
Saskatchewan-based VIDO-Intervac.
 While every effort in Canada is being made to expedite
vaccine development, we must not compromise safety,
efficacy and quality.
 Early planning is underway to prepare for vaccine
availability and administration through public programs.
11.A - Projections on cases and deaths
 It is important to recognize that models are imperfect and
cannot predict what will happen in terms of cases or
deaths in Canada.
 Specifically, what models can provide, is a prediction of
what could happen under various scenarios to allow us to
prepare for the worst case and drive public health action to
enable the best possible outcome.
 Our ambition is for public health measures to result in
‘epidemic’ control, with less than 10% of Canadians
affected and fewer than 40,000 deaths.
 Based on our most recent modeling, it is forecast that by
the end of the week of April 19th, total numbers of cases
will reach 33,000-37,000 and total numbers of deaths will
reach 1600-1900.
 We all play a role in influencing these numbers and their
trajectory. We must continue to control the epidemic using
tried and true public health measures. If we ease up too
early, we will lose the considerable progress we have
made.
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking the
necessary action to continue to protect the health and
safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON PHAC’S ACTIONS TO PREDICT COVID-19 CASES …
 For the estimates provided today, projected numbers of
cases and deaths were developed through modelling
studies conducted by the Public Health Agency of Canada,
informed by external experts in Canada and internationally.
 We continue to collaborate with provincial partners. Based
on our most recent modeling, it is forecast that by the end
of the week of April 19th, total numbers of cases will reach
33,000-37,000 and total numbers of deaths will reach
1600-1900.
 We all play a role in influencing these numbers and their
trajectory. We must continue to control the epidemic using
tried and true public health measures. If we ease up too
early, we will lose the considerable progress we have
made.
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking the
necessary action to continue to protect the health and
safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON PHAC’S ACTIONS TO PREDICT COVID-19 CASES …
 For the estimates provided today, projected numbers of
cases and deaths were developed through modelling
studies conducted by the Public Health Agency of Canada,
informed by external experts in Canada and internationally.
 We continue to collaborate with provincial and territorial
governments and universities to explore modelling
scenarios and forecasts for COVID-19 in Canada.
11.B - PT modelling - Differences in infection rates
 The COVID-19 epidemic in Canada comprises a number
of different epidemics in the different provinces and
territories.
 Modelling studies have been conducted to predict the
numbers of cases and deaths at a national scale by the
Public Health Agency of Canada.
 Some provincial and territorial public health authorities are
conducting their own modelling to determine the projected
numbers of COVID-19 related cases and deaths, and to
plan for health system capacity.
 Modelling results from the provinces align with those
conducted by the Public Health Agency of Canada, but
provide more province-specific detail for within-province
planning.
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking the
necessary action to continue to protect the health and
safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON PT ACTIONS TO PREDICT COVID-19 CASES …
 As for studies conducted by the Public Health Agency of
Canada, those conducted by provinces are for planning
purposes and are not predictions of the future.
 Different types of modelling are being conducted by
different jurisdictions.
 Dynamical (mathematical) modelling approaches are being
used by British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan,
Manitoba, Ontario, and Prince Edward Island.
 “What if” forecasting approaches have been, or are being,
used by British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, New
Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Newfoundland & Labrador.
 Dynamical modelling approaches are in the process of
being adopted by the Territories, while the Public Health
Agency of Canada is assisting Indigenous communities
with modelling needs.
