Created: 2024-02-27T16:17:32.013593
Name: Consumer_Product_Enforcement_Summary_Report_-_General_Prohibition_Project_2019-2020:_Drawstrings_on_Children’s_upper_outerwear
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/drawstrings-childrens-outerwear-2019-2020.html
Package ID: d7bec031-a8eb-4138-bdf6-54c38e1f79bc
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Enforcement', 'Summary Report', 'General Prohibition Project', 'Drawstrings on Children’s-upper-outerwear', 'children’s-upper-outerwear', 'industry’s compliance', 'performance criteria', 'ASTM F1816-18', 'Standard Safety Specification']
Notes: The purpose of this general prohibition project was to verify industry’s compliance of children’s upper outerwear with the performance criteria of the ASTM F1816-18, Standard Safety Specification for Drawstrings on Children’s Upper Outerwear.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - General Prohibition Project 2019-2020: Drawstrings on Children’s upper outerwear - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - General Prohibition Project 2019-2020: Drawstrings on Children’s upper outerwear Fiscal Year 2019-2020 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this general prohibition project was to verify industry’s compliance of children’s upper outerwear with the performance criteria of the ASTM F1816-18, Standard Safety Specification for Drawstrings on Children’s Upper Outerwear. For this project, compliance of select children’s upper outerwear with the ASTM F1816-18, Standard Safety Specification for Drawstrings on Children’s Upper Outerwear was determined through an inspection process by which Health Canada inspectors visited establishments and visually inspected relevant products. Compliance with the performance criteria listed under the Standard was verified by Health Canada inspectors on site. Prior to initiating this general prohibition project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of children’s upper outerwear companies in Canada. This effort resulted in a list of importers and manufacturers of these products in Canada. These companies were sent a letter to advise them of the project and their responsibilities under the CCPSA. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2019-2020 fiscal year, visual evaluation of 39 different products was carried out. The evaluation resulted in 12 recalls and 4 commitments to address non-compliance. There were 24 instances where no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Austin Child’s hoodie L&P Apparel No compliance issues detected None Burton Various children’s upper outerwear Burton Snowboard No compliance issues detected None Burton Various children’s upper outerwear Groupe Rossignol Canada Inc. No compliance issues detected None Calikids Red nylon jacket TJ’s the Kiddies Store No compliance issues detected None Canadian Collective Ltd. Edition Kids and Youth Full Zip Lago Apparel Ltd. Non-compliant advertisement of children’s upper outerwear with drawstring at the hood and neck area Commitment by Lago Apparel Ltd. Colimaçon Various jackets Groupe Boyz No compliance issues detected None Gildan Various children’s upper outerwear Gildan No compliance issues detected None Gildan, King Athletics, Dyenomite Apparel Various children’s upper outerwear Westmount Distributors No compliance issues detected None Hatley Playful Horse winter jacket Hatley Little Blue House No compliance issues detected None Kids World Kids jacket Magic Dealz Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the waist and bottom of children’s upper outerwear sizes 2T to 16 Voluntary recall by Magic Dealz Kidz Global Multi-fabric Fur Lined Zipped Sweatshirt Kidz Global Apparel Ltd. No compliance issues detected None Kobe Youth hoodies and jacket Kobe Sportswear Inc. Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 Voluntary recall by Kobe Sportswear Inc. Koko Noko Boys vest Lussobaby Non-compliant advertisement of children’s upper outerwear with drawstring at the hood and neck area Commitment by Lussobaby Ltd. MEC MEC Stratosphere Hoodie Mountain Equipment Co-operative No compliance issues detected None Miki House Down coat Miki House (Unit Touch International Entreprise Inc.) No compliance issues detected None Nununu Hoodie and jacket Do-Gree Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 and drawstring at the waist and bottom of children’s upper outerwear sizes 2T to 16 Voluntary recall by Do-Gree Racine Carrée Various children’s sweaters and sweatshirts Racine Carrée Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 Voluntary recall by Racine Carrée Redwood Youth Hoodie Redwood Classics by WS & Co. Ltd. No compliance issues detected None Reima Tyyni and Sleet Girl’s Winter Jackets R.M.P. Athletic Locker Ltd. No compliance issues detected None Smafolk Penguin jacket Modern Rascals No compliance issues detected None Stormfighter Children’s 2-piece rainsuit McCordick Glove & Safety Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 and drawstring at the waist and bottom of children’s upper outerwear sizes 2T to 16 Voluntary recall by McCordick Glove & Safety Team Outfitters, Under Armour Youth hoodies Winnipeg Outfitters Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 Voluntary recall by Ark Imports Unknown Velvet vest Birdz Children & Co Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 Voluntary recall by Birdz Children & Co Urban Kids and West 49 Various children’s jackets YM Inc. Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 and drawstring at the waist and bottom of children’s upper outerwear sizes 2T to 16 Voluntary recall by West 49 and YM Inc. Various Children’s jackets Bianca Amor Liquidation's Supercentre Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 Voluntary recall by Bianca Amor Liquidation's Supercentre Various Various hooded sweatshirts Quality Sportswear No compliance issues detected None Various Various children’s upper outerwear King Athletics No compliance issues detected None Various Various children’s upper outerwear Mobo Promotional Solutions Non-compliant advertisement of children’s upper outerwear with drawstring at the hood and neck area Commitment by Mobo Promotional Solutions Various Various hoodies Rainbow Sportswear (Artic Wear) Non-compliant advertisement of children’s upper outerwear with drawstring at the hood and neck area Commitment by Rainbow Sportswear Various Various children’s upper outerwear R.M.P. Athletic Locker Ltd. Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 and drawstring at the waist and bottom of children’s upper outerwear sizes 2T to 16 Voluntary recall by R.M.P. Athletic Locker Ltd. Various Various children’s upper outerwear Canadian Tire Corporation No compliance issues detected None Various Various children’s upper outerwear PVH Canada Inc. No compliance issues detected None Various Various children’s upper outerwear Clément Ltée No compliance issues detected None Various Various children’s upper outerwear Island Beach Company No compliance issues detected None Various Various children’s upper outerwear East Coast Lifestyle No compliance issues detected None Various Various children’s upper outerwear Sherlock Clothing Company No compliance issues detected None Various Various children’s upper outerwear Cow’s Inc. No compliance issues detected None West Coast Kids jacket West Coast Kids No compliance issues detected None Wetskins and Freshwater Children’s rainsuits World Famous Sales of Canada Inc. Did not meet the performance criteria of drawstring at the hood and neck area of children’s upper outerwear sizes 0 to 12 and drawstring at the waist and bottom of children’s upper outerwear sizes 2T to 16 Voluntary recall by World Famous Sales of Canada Inc. Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2020-03-25 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy