Created: 2022-07-25T16:24:46.528374
Name: Briefing_binder_of_the_Deputy_Minister_of_Health_before_the_Standing_Committee_on_Health_on_Public_Accounts_(PACP)_–_Natural_health_products
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/d84fcbcf-4bff-4b5f-9cd5-41a86d05b78e/resource/f9febd7a-5c87-4155-ad34-fd71993ad09e/download/briefing-binder-of-the-deputy-minister-of-health-before-the-standing-committee-on-health-on-publ.pdf
Package ID: d84fcbcf-4bff-4b5f-9cd5-41a86d05b78e
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'legislation', 'health', 'natural health products']
Notes: Briefing binder of the Deputy Minister of Health before the Standing Committee on Health on Public Accounts (PACP) – Natural health products
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
HEALTH CANADA APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (PACP)
2021 REPORT OF THE CESD ON NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS MARCH 24, 2022
Remarks
1. Opening Remarks
Context
2. Scenario Note and Context / Official Notice
3. DepartmentalStatement on Health Canada Website
4. Management Response Action Plan (MRAP)
Q&As / QP Notes
5. Q&A Document
6. QP Note-CESD’s 2021 Audit of the NHP Program
Background Documents
7. CESD 2021 Audit on Natural Health Products / Survey
8. Communications Plan
9. Media lines
10. Departmental Audit Committee (DAC) Overview Presentation
11. REDACTED–Confidence of the Queen’s Privy Council
12. PACP Committee Member Information
Opening Remarks
DM Health Canada Dr. Stephen Lucas
House ofCommons Standing Committee on Public Accounts (PACP)
Report 2—Natural Health Products—Health Canada March 24, 2022
11:00 am to 1:00 pm
I would like to thank the Committee members for the opportunity to appear before them today.
I am pleased to have beeninvited, alongside my colleagues Jerry DeMarco, Commissioner of the
Environment and Sustainable Development, and Heather Miller, Assistant Auditor General, from the
Office of the Auditor General.
Joining me today is Pam Aung-Thin, Associate Assistant Deputy Minister of the Health Products and
Food Branch at Health Canada. The branch is responsible for product and site licensing, as well as
advertising monitoring. Also joining me today is Linsey Hollett, Director General of Health Product
Compliance for theRegulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch at Health Canada. The branch is
responsible for compliance and enforcement activities.
Natural health products are used by Canadians daily to care for themselves and their families. This
includes vitamin supplements, minerals, probiotics, herbal remedies, homeopathic products, and
traditional products, such as traditional Chinese medicines. Natural health products also include
frequently used products such as toothpaste, mouthwash and sunscreen. Particularly relevant in the
context of COVID-19, natural health products include alcohol-based hand sanitizers.
In Canada, these products are regulated under the Food and Drugs Act and the Natural Health Products
Regulations. Through the Natural Health Products Program,Health Canada provides oversight to ensure
that the natural health products available for sale in Canada are safe and effective.
In April 2021, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development tabled an audit
report of the Natural HealthProducts Program. The objective of the audit was to determine whether
Health Canada ensures that the natural health products available for sale in Canada are safe and
accurately represented to consumers. During the course of the audit, the scope was expanded to
include Health Canada’s response to COVID-19 specific to the Natural Health Products Program.
Overall, the audit identified both strengths and areas for improvement. The audit found that Health
Canada licensed products appropriately, based on evidence of safety and efficacy. The audit also found
that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention, immediate action was taken.
Additionally, the audit established that Health Canada’s approach to increase the supply of alcohol-
based hand sanitizers during the pandemic was appropriate.
The audit also identified areas for improvement, such as:
• the need for increased oversight of the quality of natural health products,
• greater monitoring of labels and advertising (including online),
• improvedlabelling, and
• proactive risk-based compliance and enforcement activities.
The recommendations validated key gaps that the Department had already identified and started
working to address. The audit supports the direction Health Canada has been taking over the past six
years to strengthen oversight of these products.
To address the recommendation to improve quality oversight, Health Canada has taken steps to require
site licence applicants to demonstrate compliance with Good Manufacturing Practices, such as by
requiring test results instead of relying on an attestation-based approach.
In March 2021, Health Canada launched the Natural Health Products Good Manufacturing Practices
Inspection Pilot to promote and verify industry compliance with regulatory requirements through
inspections of licence holders across Canada. Results of the pilot to date are demonstrating a high rate
of non-compliance and a need for further industry education as well as ongoing proactive risk-based
oversight. In this vein, HealthCanada is on track to implement a permanent NHP Good Manufacturing
Practices inspection program to help increase oversight of NHPs and better protect Canadians.
The Department is building on work that began during the pandemic to expand its oversight of online
advertising of natural health products, to ensure advertisements are consistent with the product license.
Additionally, the Department recently consulted on a regulatory proposal to improve product labelling,
with the objective to ensure labels are clear, consistent and legible for consumers to support safe use of
these products.
In the response to the audit, Health Canada indicated its intent to propose new tools to strengthen the
Department’s ability to deter and address non-compliance, notably theextension of powers under the
Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act to natural health products. Known as
Vanessa’s Law and introduced in 2014, this law strengthened Health Canada’s ability to collect
information and take quick and appropriate actionwhen a serious health risk is identified. These
authorities exist for drugs and medical devices, but not for natural health products.
As a result, Health Canada lacks the authority to force a recall or a label change of a product, even in the
case of a serious health risk such as contamination.
In our Departmental response to the audit findings, Health Canada reaffirmed the need for sustainable
and predictable funding through fees charged to industry to support increased oversight of these
products. Natural health products are the only line of health products for which all regulatory activities
are funded by the public.
Revenues from fees would support pre-and post-market regulatory activities, including inspections of
the facilities that make them.
In closing, Health Canada’s priority is the health and safety of Canadians. For many Canadians, natural
health products are an important part of maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Health Canada welcomes the
Commissioner’s recommendations and is committed to the continuous improvement of our Natural
Health Products Program to help ensure that products sold in Canada are safe and effective.
Again, I would like thank the Committee for inviting me. I will be pleased to answer any questions you
may have.
SCENARIO NOTE
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (PACP)–2021 REPORT 2 OF
THE COMMISSIONER OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
March 24, 2022
MEETING CONTEXT
• On March 24, 2022, you are invited to appear for 2 hours (from 11:00 AMto 1:00 PM) at the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts (PACP).
• You will be appearing before the Committee in view of its study of Report 2 of the
Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development on Natural Health Products.
MEETING SCENARIO
• At this meeting you, Pamela Aung-Thin (HPFB), and Linsey Hollett (ROEB) will be on a panel with
the following officials:
o Jerry V. DeMarco, Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development.
o Heather Miller, Assistant Auditor General, Officeof the Auditor General
• The Committee meeting will open with the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable
Development providing opening remarks. You will then provide your 5-minute opening remarks.
• You and other officials will then take questions from Committee members for the remainder of
the time.
o The first round of questions are generally 6 minutes in length in the following order:
Conservative Party, Liberal Party, Bloc Québécois, NDP.
o The second and subsequent round(s), the order and time of questioning is as follows:
Conservative Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes), Bloc Québécois (2.5 minutes), NDP (2.5
minutes), Conservative Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes)
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
• The Commissioner of the Environmentand Sustainable Development (CESD) conducted a
performance audit focused on Health Canada’s oversight of natural health products. The CESD
concluded that Health Canada is unable to ensure that natural health products available in the Canadian
marketplaceare safe, effective, and accurately represented to consumers. The Audit was tabled April
22, 2021.
• When the Speaker tables a report by the Auditor General in the House of Commons, it is
automatically referred to the Public Accounts Committee. The Committee selects the chapters of the
report it wants to study and calls the CESD and senior public servants from the audited organizations to
appear before it to respond to the Commissioner’s findings.
• Government policy, and the extent to which policy objectives are achieved, are generally not
examined by the Public Accounts Committee. Instead, the Committee focuses on government
administration–the economy and efficiency of program delivery as well as the adherence to
government policies, directives and standards. The Committee seeks to hold the government to account
for effective public administration and due regard for public funds.
• At the conclusion of a study, the Committee may present a report to the House of Commons
that includes recommendations to thegovernment for improvements in administrative and financial
practices and controls of federal departments and agencies.
• Owing to its unique mandate, there is an expectation at PACP that all questions and answers
during an appearance remain within the bounds of the study at hand.
• In the context of the upcoming meeting, the members of PACP will focus their questions on the
Auditor General’s report and the Department’s Management Response and Action Plan (MRAP). The
following are the recommendations in the report that has been addressed in the MRAP:
 Health Canada should obtain
 sufficient evidence to verify that licensed sites follow good manufacturing practices before
products are released on the market
 nformation about which natural health products are available on the market
- Health Canada should, for licensed natural health products on the market, including on the
Internet, take a risk-based approach to
 ensure that product labels are readable
 monitor product label and advertisement information to ensure that they contain accurate
and complete product information, consistent with their licence conditions
o Health Canada should develop a risk-based monitoring and inspection program that establishes
the scope and frequency of inspections and that considersrisks related to products, sites, and problems
raised from its follow-up activities.
o Health Canada should develop a risk-based monitoring program to
-identify unlicensed products and take appropriate action so that they are not available for sale to
consumers in Canada
-identify unauthorized activities and take appropriate action so that labelling and advertisements meet
product-licence conditions
o Health Canada should develop a risk-based monitoring program to identify unlicensed products
and take appropriate action so that they are not available for sale to consumers in Canada identify
unauthorized activities and take appropriate action so that labelling and advertisements meet product-
licence conditions
PACP COMMITTEE MEETING
Notices ofMeeting include information about the subject matter to be examined by the committee and
date, time and place of the meeting, as well as a list of any witnesses scheduled to appear. The Evidence
is the edited and revised transcript of what is said before acommittee. The Minutes of
are the official record of the business conducted by the committee at a sitting.
For an advanced search, use Publication Search tool.
If you have any questions or comments regarding the accessibility of this publication, please contact us
ataccessible@parl.gc.ca.
NOTICE OF MEETING
Standing committee on Public Accounts (PACP)
44thparliament, 1stsession
Meeting 10
- Thursday, March 24, 2022, 11:00 am to 1:00 pm
Report 2, Natural Health Products–Health Canada, by the Commissionerof the Environment and
Sustainable Development
Department of Health Canada-Santé Canada
- Dr. Stephen Lucas, Deputy Minister
- Pamela Aung-Thin, Associate Assistance Deputy Minister
- Lindsey Hollett, Director General, Health Product Compliance
Office of theAuditor General
- Jerry V. DeMarco, Commissioner of the Environment and Sustaineble Development
- Heather Miller, Assistant Auditor General
Clerk of the Committee
- Angela Crandall
Health Canada responds to the Spring
2021 Report of theCommissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development
From: Health Canada
Statement
April, 22, 2021 | Ottawa, ON | Health Canada
Today, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development tabled his spring report and
presented the results of the audit on Health Canada’s Natural Health Products Program. The audit
focussed on natural health products available for sale in Canada to ensure that they are safe, effective
and accurately represented to consumers.
Canada has one of the best regulatory systems in the world for natural health products, with some of
the most stringent requirements. Health Canada recognizes the importance of ensuring that natural
health products available for sale in Canada are safe and effective.
Overall, the audit identified both strengths and areas for improvement within the Program. It found that
Health Canada licensed natural health products appropriately, based on evidence of safety and efficacy.
The audit also found that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention, immediate action
was taken. Additionally, the audit established that Health Canada’s approach to increase the supply of
hand sanitizers–a natural health product–available to Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic was
appropriate. Canada was experiencing an unprecedented demand for these products, which was on
average six-fold higher than the previous year.
The audit also identified areas for improvement. We welcome the Commissioner’s recommendations to
increase the oversight of natural health products. Our department is already working to address all of
the recommendations and is taking steps to accelerate its efforts to strengthen the natural health
products program, including increased oversight of quality, advertising and labelling. Thisincludes
strengthening the oversight of online advertising to ensure that Canadians have accurate and reliable
information to inform their choices, launching an inspection pilot program intended to inform the
development of a permanent inspection program,bringing forward a regulatory proposal to improve
labelling so product labels are clear, consistent and legible for consumers, and helping ensure that the
department has the tools to protect the health and safety of Canadians when a serious health risk arises.
Health Canada’s priority is the health and safety of Canadians. For many Canadians, natural health
products are an important part of maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Health Canada is committed to the
continuous improvement of its natural health products program to help ensure that products sold in
Canada are safe and effective.
HEALTH CANADA MANAGEMENT RESPONSE AND ACTION PLAN (MRAP)
In response to the recommendations of the Natural Health Product Program of the Spring 2021 Report
of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development to the Parliament of Canada
Note: The MRAP has certain dependencies on undertaking legislative and/or regulatory changes. In
recognition of these dependencies, the key milestones have been divided into two parts to reflect
milestones that fall within and outside the existing NHP program’s framework. Actions listed as within
the existing framework would not require legislative and/or regulatory changes to implement.
Report Ref.: Para 24
- OAGrecommendations
o Health Canada should obtain
o Sufficient evidence to verify that licensed sites followed GMPs before products were
released on the market.
o Information about which NHPs are available on the market.
- Departmental Response
o Agreed. Health Canada notes its limited regulatory authorities to compel companies to
provide information on quality as part of the product license submission process.
Applicants are only required to provide an attestation that their product will meet the
prescribed quality requirements. To improve its pre-market quality oversight of NHPs,
the Department has been using information gathered through two Compliance
Monitoring Projects and a paper-based audit of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) at
a number of manufacturing sites.The Department also acknowledges that NHPs are the
only line of health products for which all regulatory activities are funded by the public.
The absence of a stable funding framework combined with the limited regulatory
authorities for quality has placedsignificant pressure on the Department to perform its
regulatory activities and efficiently respond to the increasingly high number and
scientific complexity of product submissions. In response to this recommendation,
Health Canada will:
o Establish fully costed options for a risk-based approach to quality oversight prior to the
issuance or renewal of licenses and determine the full regulatory and operational
implications of these options;
o Explore mechanisms to obtain information about which products are available on the
market; and
o Take steps to propose user fees to NHPs to offset the costs of licensing and post-market
activities.
- Description of Final Expected Outcome/Result
o Health Canada has appropriate requirements in place to ensure oversight of quality
prior to the issuance or renewal of licences, which includes information about which
NHPs are available on the Canadian market.
- Expected Final Completion Date
o November 2024 for improved quality oversight (if regulatory change is advanced as part
of the approved recommendation(s))
- Key Interim Milestones (Description\Dates)
o Within existing framework
o Assess the capacity and tools required in the pre-market functions associated with
quality review to effectively deliver mandated program activities, identify gaps, and
develop an options analysis report with recommendations, which are expected to
include proposed regulatory amendments. (January 2022)
o Based on the approved recommendation(s), develop a multi-year implementation plan,
to improve the pre-market oversight of the quality of NHPs. (September 2022)
o Signal to industry the Department’s intention to implement fees for NHPs to provide
stable funding for key regulatory activities and develop a fee proposal for consultation
(October 2021)
o Consult on a cost recovery proposal (April 2022
o Amend the Fees Order to include NHPs (October 2023).
o Outside existing framework
o Dependent on the approved recommendation(s), seek regulatory amendments to
improve the oversight of the quality of NHPs (Timelines will be based on the
implementation plan)
Report Ref.: Para 33
- OAG recommendations
o Health Canada should, for licensed natural health products on the market, including the
internet, take a risk-based approach to:
o ensure that product labels are readable
o monitor product labeland advertisement information to ensure that they contain
accurate and complete product information, consistent with their license conditions
- Departmental Response
o Agreed. The department has started to take steps through extensive stakeholder
engagement and the development of a regulatory proposal to improve the labelling of
NHPs, to make them easier to read, understand and compare with other similar
products. Health Canada will:
o Continue to pursue regulatory and policy changes to improve labelling of NHPs;
o Explore options to require licence holders to display a Canadian label, including an NPN,
in advertisements targeted to Canadians;
o Take steps to implement a comprehensive proactive monitoring strategy to ensure that
labels and advertising of NHPs are consistent with the product licence.
- Description of Final Expected Outcome/Result
o Health Canada has a regulatory framework in place to ensure clear labelling of NHPs.
Health Canada has implemented proactive monitoring of labelling and advertising
information of NHPs to ensure information is consistent with licensing conditions.
- Expected final Completion Date
o June 2022 for improved labelling in Canada Gazette Part II;
o October 2022 to implement proactive monitoring of NHP advertising
- Key interim Milestones (Description/Dates)
o Within existing framework
o Pilot an approach, analyze the pilot and develop a multi-year implementation plan to
expand proactive monitoring of advertising to NHPs, including full costing and the
identification of Artificial Intelligence toolsneeded for the expanded approach (February
2022)
o Conduct a feasibility study to expand proactive monitoring oversight to online
monitoring of NHP labels (June 2022)
o Begin implementation of the approved approach for the expansion of proactive
monitoring ofadvertising of NHPs (October 2022)
o Complete an analysis on the display format of a Canadian label online, including
presentation of the NPN, to identify recommended options and a critical path forward
(December 2022)
o Evaluate lessons learned to determine feasibility of expanded proactive monitoring of
NHPs and make necessary modifications as per an internal proactive monitoring process
review (September 2023)
o Outside existing framework
o Publish proposed amendments to the Natural Health Products Regulations (NHPR) in
Canada Gazette I to improve the labelling of NHPs with a product facts table and
minimum font size, for formal consultation (targeting June 2021)
o Dependent on the above, publish final regulatory amendments to the NHPR in Canada
Gazette II to improve the labelling of NHPs (targeting June 2022)
Report Ref.: Para 45
- OAG recommendations
o Health Canada should develop a risk-based monitoring and inspection program that
establishes the scope and frequency of inspections and that considers risks related to
products, sites and problems raised from its follow-up activities.
- Departmental Response
o Agreed. Health Canada recognizes that NHPs are the only line of health products for
which there is no ability to mandate a recall or to impose terms and conditions to
mitigate safety risks associated with these products. The Department has completed a
numbercompliance monitoring projects to gather information on quality oversight of
NHPs and recognizes the need to expand its activities into a more robust inspection
program. Health Canada will:
o Implement a pilot NHP Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) inspection program to
promote and verify compliance of the NHP industry through inspections of licence
holders across Canada, and take further actions based on the outcomeof this pilot;
o Take steps to propose new tools to strengthen Health Canada’s ability to deter and
address non-compliance which include moving forward with a proposal to extend the
use of Vanessa’s Law powers to NHPs;
o Establish fully costed options for a risk-based approach to inspections; and
o Take steps to propose the expansion of user fees to NHPs to offset the costs of post-
market activities.
- Description of Final Expected Outcome/Result
o Health Canada has an effective risk-based approach to monitoring andinspection to
manage the post marketrisk related to products and sites
- Expected final Completion Date
o April 2023 for risk-based monitoring plan; November 2022 for Vanessa Law powers
- Key interim Milestones (Description/Dates)
o Within existing framework
o Launch a pilot NHP GMP inspection program (March 2021)
o Assess the results of the pilot and identify options for a risk-based NHP inspection
program, which includes full costing (April 2022)
o Complete consultations with stakeholders on a recommendation for a future risk-based
NHP inspection program (August 2022)
o See interim milestones for recommendation 24 regarding fees
o Based on the approved recommendation(s) and existing resources, determine next
steps to implement an effective risk-based approach to monitoring compliance and
inspections (April 2023)
o Outside existing framework
o Seek authority to introduce legislative amendments to the Food and Drugs Act with a
view to expand the Vanessa’s Law powers to NHPs (October 2021)
o Dependent on obtaining authority,consult stakeholders on the policy and
implementation to extend the use of
o Vanessa’s Law powers to NHPs (January 2022)
o Dependent on obtaining authority, start to develop regulations to extend the full suite
of Vanessa’s Law authorities to NHPs (November 2022)
Report Ref.: Para 49
- OAG recommendations
- Health Canada should develop a risk-based monitoring program to:
- Identify unlicensed products and take appropriate action so that they are not available for sale
to consumers in Canada
- Identify unauthorizedactivities and take appropriate action so that advertisements meet
product license conditions
- Departmental Response
- Agreed. Health Canada does maintain a complaint-based program for regulatory advertising
compliance oversight but recognizes that an additional risk-based approach is required to
ensure unauthorized activities are prevented and/or stopped. Health Canada will:
- Implement a risk-based approach to monitoring of advertising; and
- Take steps to propose new tools to strengthen its ability to deter and address non-compliance,
which include moving forward with a proposal to
- extend the use of Vanessa’s Law powers to NHPs.
- Description of Final Expected Outcome/Result
- Health Canada has a comprehensive risk-based approach applied to NHP advertising incidents
- Expected final Completion Date
- January 2022 for risk-based monitoring of advertising; November 2022 for Vanessa’s Law
powers
- Key interim Milestones (Description/Dates)
- Within existing framework
- Develop and launch a risk-based approach formonitoring NHP advertising incidents, via a tool
which will classify advertising incidents based on level of risk (January 2022)
- Assess the feasibility of partnering with other government departments (OGDs) to address non-
compliance in NHP advertising. This will also include the development of costing assumptions
(January 2022)
- Subject to approval, implement a collaboration approach jointly with OGDs and
- the Department to allow OGDs to use existing enforcement powers for serious non-compliance
incidents inadvertising of NHPs (April 2022)
- Outside existing framework
- See interim milestones for recommendation 45 regarding Vanessa’s Law
Report Ref.: Para 54
- OAG recommendations
o Health Canada should, in cases of products suspected of causing serious health risk,
o Obtain the information it needs to verify and ensure that these products are not
available for sale to consumers in Canada
- Departmental Response
o Agreed. In addition to the immediate steps Health Canada already takes to protect the
health and safety of Canadians when a serious risk to health is identified, Health Canada
will:
o Take steps to propose new tools to strengthen its ability to deter and address non-
compliance, which include moving forward with a proposal to
o extend the use of Vanessa’s Law powers toNHPs; and
o Take steps to propose the expansion of user fees to NHPs to offset the costs of licensing
and post-market activities.
- Description of Final Expected Outcome/Result
o Health Canada has strengthened tools to, in cases of products suspected of causing
serious health risk, obtain information and ensure the products are not available to
consumers.
- Expected final Completion Date
o November 2022 for Vanessa’s Law powers
- Key interim Milestones (Description/Dates)
o Within existing framework
o See interimmilestones for recommendation 24 regarding fees
o Outside existing framework
o See interim milestones for recommendation 45 regarding Vanessa’s Law
Question & Answers
Health Canada Appearance at the Standing Committee onPublic Accounts (PACP)
Study of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development’s (CESD) 2021 Audit on
Natural Health Products
March 24, 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEX OF QUESTIONS
1.1 OVERVIEW OF AUDIT OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
1.2 GENERAL QUESTIONS ON THE NHP PROGRAM
1.3 AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS ON QUALITY
1.4 AUDITRECOMMENDATIONS ON LABELLING
1.5 AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS ON ADVERTISING
1.6 AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONSON MONITORING AND COMPLIANCE
1.7 HC RESPONSE: COST RECOVERY FOR NHPs
1.8 HCRESPONSE: VANESSA’S LAW
1.9 COVID-19: HC’S OVERSIGHT OF ONLINE MARKETING
1.10 COVID-19: MODIFIEDAPPROACH FOR HAND SANITIZERS
INDEX OF QUESTIONS
INDEX OF QUESTIONS
1.1 OVERVIEW OF AUDIT OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
Q1. What was the objective of the audit?
Q2. What findings and recommendations did the audit report include, and howis the Department
responding?
Q3. Have you encountered delays in implementing the CESD audit recommendations?
1.2 GENERAL QUESTIONS ON THE NHP PROGRAM
Q4. Are the natural health products on the market safe to use? Should Canadians be concerned that
Health Canada’s lack of oversight is putting them at risk?
Q5. Why do these gaps exist in the oversight of natural health products? Why has Health Canada not
already taken more action to improve its regulatory approach?
1.3 AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS ON QUALITY
Q6. What steps is Health Canada taking to strengthen its oversight of the quality of natural health
products?
Q7. How will Health Canada identify which natural health productsare available on the market?
1.4 AUDITRECOMMENDATIONS ON LABELLING
Q8. Why is Health Canada proposing amendments for natural health product labels?
Q9. What is the proposal to improve labellingfor natural health products?
Q10. What is the currentstatus of this proposal?
Q11. Has Health Canada engaged in meaningful consultations withstakeholders on this proposal?
Q12. Aren’t new labelling requirements for natural health products going to create unnecessary and
costly burden for industry?
1.5 AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONSON ADVERTISING
Q13. What regulatory activities specific to advertising were subject to the audit?
Q14. What were the key challenges in regulatory advertising oversight identified by the audit?
Q15. What were the audit’s key findingsrelated to advertising oversight of NHPs
Q16. What is Health Canada doing to address these gaps/challenges as identified in the audit report?
Q17. What is the status of this commitment?
1.6 AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONSON MONITORING AND COMPLIANCE
Q18. Canadians rely on Health Canada to ensure that the health products they consume are safe and
effective. The 2021 CESD audit clearly indicates that your department has fallen short of that objective.
What do you say to Canadians about the lack of proper oversight of natural health products, and the
health risk this creates for them?
Q19. What kind of non-compliance exists at NHP facilities? How serious is it and what isHealth
Canada doing about it?
Q20. How do you address non-compliance? Especially cases of repetitive non-compliance?
Q21. Natural health products and over-the-counter (OTC) drugs are sold side-by-side on drug store
shelves. To most people, they are indistinguishable. The maximum fine for an infraction is $5,000 for a
NHP and $5 million for an OTC drug. Why such a large difference? Why are the penalties for violations of
the NHP regulations so light?
Q22. How many NHP manufacturing facilities are inspected annually? How many of these are planned
inspections versus inspections that respond to industrywhistleblowers or informants?
Q23. The audit identified the absence of a routine inspection program as an oversight gap. What
steps has HC taken to address this absence? What future stepsHC intends to take and when?
Q24. Why does HC not conduct monitoring of all licensed products and manufacturers, given the
potential risk that non-compliance poses to Canadians?
Q25. What is the status of the commitments Health Canada made under the MRAP, related to
compliance and enforcement, specifically
Q26. Can you describe the key findings of the oversight pilot?
Q27. Why has the department not yet put in place stable funding for the inspection program to
addressthe audit’s recommendations?
Q28. Does the department plan to consider some of the lessons learned during the COVID-19
pandemic to improve the oversight of NHPs?
1.7 HC RESPONSE: COST RECOVERY FOR NHPs
Q29. How will implementing fees on the Natural Health Products industry contribute to improve the
compliance and enforcement mechanisms to ensure thesafety of Canadian consumers?
Q30. How will Health Canada make sure that the new fees do not become a deterrent for Canadian
innovation in the Natural Health Products industry?
Q31. If fees to regulate Natural Health Products are implemented, how is Health Canada going to
minimize the impact to small businesses?
1.8 HC RESPONSE: VANESSA’S LAW
Q32. The Departmental response to the audit included an indication that it would be seeking
Vanessa’s Law powers for natural health products, despite this not being a recommendation made
through the audit. Why are these measures necessary? Are there gaps in Health Canada’sability to
take action when safety issues emerge?
Q33. According to the timelines set by the Department in the MRAP, you should have already sought
these authorities last fall and would be in the process of consulting stakeholders on the implementation
of these measures. What is the status of Health Canada’s proposal to extend
Vanessa’s Law authorities to apply to natural health products?
1.9 COVID-19: HC’SOVERSIGHT OF ONLINE MARKETING
Q34. Why did it take a global pandemic for the department to effectively monitor NHPs(e.g.,
proactive monitoring)?
Q35. With regards to COVID-19 advertising monitoring, what were the activities reviewed by the
CESD audit during themonths of April and May 2020?
Q36. What were the audit findings related to this work carried out starting in April and May? 26
Q37. What did the audit recommend?
Q38. What other keyinformation should be noted?
1.10 COVID-19: MODIFIEDAPPROACH FOR HAND SANITIZERS
Q39. What actions did Health Canada take to increase the supply of hand sanitizers in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic?
Q40. What activities were reviewed during the audit and what were the key findings related to this
work?
Q41. How did Health Canada ensure the safety of hand sanitizers under these interim measures?
Q1. What was the objective of the audit?
The focus of the audit was to determine whether Health Canada ensures that the natural health
products available for sale in Canada are safe and accurately represented to consumers. During the
course of theaudit, the scope was expanded to include Health Canada’s response to COVID-19 specific
to the Natural Health Products Program.
Q2. What findings and recommendations did the audit report include, and how is theDepartment
responding?
Overall areas of strength:
• The audit found that Health Canada licensed natural health products appropriately, based on
evidence of safety and efficacy.
• The audit also found that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention, appropriate
action was taken.
• Additionally, the audit established that Health Canada’s approach to increase the supply of hand
sanitizers available to Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic was appropriate.
Quality:
• In response, Health Canada will explore options to strengthen its oversight of the quality of
natural health products, and mechanisms to obtain information about which natural health products are
on the market.
• Health Canada also reaffirmed the need for sustainable and predictable funding through user
fees to support increased oversight of these products. Natural health products are the only line of health
products for which all regulatory activities are funded by the public.
Compliance and enforcement:
• The audit recommended that Health Canada develop proactive risk-basedactivities, including
inspections, as part of its compliance and enforcement approach.
• The audit also noted that when an issue was brought to the Department’s attention, compliance
could not always be achieved.
• In March 2021, Health Canada launched apilot inspection program of site licence holders in
order to promote and verify industry compliance.
• The Department also intends to take steps to propose new tools to strengthen its ability to
deter and address non-compliance. This includes extending theauthorities under the Protecting
Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (also known as Vanessa’s Law) to natural health products. These
authorities currently exist for all drugs and medical devices, but not for natural health products. As a
result, Health Canadamust rely on the goodwill of companies to conduct a product recall or make label
changes, such as adding key warnings, to respond tocases of serious health risks
Labelling and advertising:
• The audit recommended increased monitoring of labels and advertising (including online
advertising) to ensure that they contain accurate product information.
• The audit also recommended that Health Canada ensure that product labels are readable.
• The Department will be taking steps to implement a comprehensiveproactive monitoring
strategy to ensure that labels and advertising are consistent with the terms of the product licence.
• The Department has already started to pursue regulatory and policy changes to make labels
easier to read, understand and compare with other similar products. This proposal was brought forward
for formal public consultation via Canada Gazette, Part 1 in June 2021.
Q3. Have you encountered delays in implementing the CESD audit recommendations?
• In response to the recommendations in the report, Health Canada is taking action to establish a
stronger and more robust Natural Health Products Program. The Department has already taken steps to
begin to address all of the audit recommendations as outlined in the Management Response Action Plan
(MRAP). In specific cases, advancing the Department’s response requires undertaking legislative and/or
regulatory changes.
• Initial timelines were set out in the MRAP, recognizing the some of these actions do not fall
solely within the Department’s authority. There are some cases where we have not been able to meet
the initial timelines set out in the MRAP--for example, the commitment to introduce legislative
amendments to the Food and Drugs Act to support the extension of Vanessa's Law powers.
• For all of these commitments, we continue to actively work in collaboration with our key partner
towards completion of all of the elements on the action plan.
Q4. Are the natural health products on the market safe to use?
Should Canadians be concerned that Health Canada’s lack of oversight is putting them at risk?
• For many Canadians, natural health products are an important part of maintaining a healthy
lifestyle. While manufacturers are ultimately responsible for ensuring the safety of the natural health
products they sell in Canada, Health Canada regulates these products so that Canadians can have
confidence that the products they use are safe, effective and of high quality.
• Through its regulatory role, Health Canada provides oversight for safety, efficacy and quality for
natural health products. Before products can be sold in Canada, products are assessed by Health Canada
before a licence is provided. This assessment includes a review of the types of ingredients, dosage, and
health claims, to determine if the product can be safely used by consumers.
• While the audit identified areas for improvement, it is important to note that Health Canada’s
approach to assessing safety and efficacy of natural health products prior to licensing was found to be
appropriate. The audit also found that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention, the
Department took appropriate action to mitigate risks to Canadians.
• The Department has accepted all of the recommendations made in the audit and has already
taken steps to address them. Health Canada remains committed to the continuous improvement of its
Natural Health Products program to help ensure that products sold in Canada are safe and effective.
Q5. Why do these gaps exist in the oversight of natural healthproducts? Why has Health Canada not
already taken more action to improve its regulatory approach?
• Health Canada is committed to the continuous improvement of its natural health products
program to ensure that products sold in Canada are safe and effective. The Department is taking steps
to address all of the recommendations in the audit report.
• The Natural Health Products Program has evolved substantially since the Natural Health
Products Regulations came into force in in 2004. To date, almost 120,000product licences have been
issued, representing over 200,000 products approved. Additionally,there are currently approximately
800 active site licenses. All current oversight activities are performed within existing budgets, without
additional funding through fees.
• Natural health products are currently the only line of health products in Canada for which all
regulatory activities are funded solely by the Department’s operating budget. Health Canada will be
introducing industry fees that would help offsetthe costs of licencing products and the sites that
manufacture them, and provide the means to scale-up licensing, monitoring, compliance and
enforcement activities.
• Health Canada has already made efforts to take more proactive steps to monitoring natural
health products. For example, in March 2021, the Department launched a pilot inspection program to
proactively assess the compliance of companies with Good Manufacturing Practices requirements. The
objective of the pilot program is to strengthen compliance of the natural health products industry.
Increased compliance with regulatory requirements protects the health and safety of Canadians by
ensuring these products are safe, effective and of high quality.
Q6. What steps is Health Canada taking tostrengthen its oversight of the quality of natural health
products?
• The audit found that the department relied on natural health product manufacturers’
attestations and did not verify key types of evidence demonstrating that natural health product sites
followed Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP).
• To address this finding, the Department has taken steps to require site licence applicants to
demonstrate GMP compliance, such as by providing test results, instead of simply attestation. This first
step waslaunched in July 2021 through the transition of the temporary COVID-19 site licences for hand
sanitizers. The Department will be looking to extend this increased oversight to all site licence applicants
in the coming year. The timing of this extended phasewill be dependent on completing the transition of
the temporary COVID-19 site licences and assessing our lessons from that first phase.
• The Department’s longer-term response to this audit recommendation is to introduce a pre-
market quality review for higher-risk products. The timing of this action, along with other additional
options for increasing quality oversight of these products are still being developed, including potential
regulatory changes.
Q7. How will Health Canada identify which natural health products are available on the market?
• The audit acknowledged that, unlike for drugs, Health Canada is not informed when natural
health products will be released on the market. This is a known gap in the Natural Health Products
Regulations¸ one thatwas previously identified by the Department and has been part of planned
improvements under existing regulatory modernization work through the Self-Care Framework.
• To address this finding in the short term, Health Canada is actively working to launch a survey in
the coming weeks to gather information on the market status of licenced natural health products.
• Based on the information received through this survey, the Department will take steps to
update the online database (specifically, the Licensed Natural Health Products Database), to reflect the
market status accordingly to ensure that the most accurate and up to date information is captured.
• The Department is exploring options to enable it to subsequently maintain and update the
information on whichNHPs are being sold to Canadians.
Q8. Why is Health Canada proposing amendments for natural health product labels?
• Key information on natural health product labels is not presented in a clear, consistent and
legible format, which makes it difficultfor consumers and health professionals to locate, read and
compare important safety information. In addition, warning information relating to contraindications or
allergens may easily be missed, leading to preventable harms, such as anaphylactic reactions.
• The audit noted examples of product label information, such as safety warnings, printed very
small–for example, in a 4-point font. Additionally, through the results of a survey that the OAG
undertook, Canadians indicated that natural health products were minimally easy to read, despite labels
being one of the most important factors influencing their decision to purchase the product.
• The proposed changes would make it easier for consumers to compare products, select the best
one for their needs and use it safely.
- Proposed amendments related to contact information may also increase the rate of reporting of
adverse reactions to manufacturers and, in turn, to Health Canada. This will expand Health Canada’s
ability to use real-world evidence to monitor the safety and effectiveness of natural health products and
to mitigate any identified risks.
Q9. What is the proposal to improve labelling for natural health products?
• Health Canada is proposing four new labelling requirements for natural healthproducts to help
Canadians make informed decisions when selecting and using these products:
o A product facts table: Important product information, such as warnings and directions for use,
would be required in a standardized table.
o Clearly and prominently displayed label text: Rules would be introduced to improve natural
health product label legibility and readability (e.g., improved colour contrast and a minimum font size
requirements) and to require the use of plain, consistent language on labels.
o Labelling of food allergens, gluten and aspartame: Priority food allergens, added sulphite,
aspartame and gluten would be identified in the warning section of the label.
o Modernized contact information: A manufacturer can display either an email address, telephone
number or website instead of a postal address, as is currently required.
• The current proposal builds on labelling best practices used for other products in Canada, such
as non-prescription drugs and food, as well as in the United States for food, non-prescription drugs and
dietary supplements.
Q10. What is the current status of this proposal?
• On June 26, 2021, Health Canada published the regulatory proposal to amend the Natural
Health Products Regulations in the Canada Gazette, Part I (CGI)for a 90-day comment period. The
Department received 139 submissions from a range of stakeholders including consumers, industry
groups, patient advocacy groups, healthcare professional associations and academics.
• The Department recently held a stakeholder engagement session to provide updates on key
changes to the proposal as a reflection of the feedback received through the formal consultation
process. Health Canada is continuing to develop key elements of the proposal in response to
stakeholder feedbackand will look to advance final regulations to Canada Gazette, Part II (CGII).
Q11. Has Health Canada engaged in meaningful consultations with stakeholders on this proposal?
• Health Canada has engaged in extensive and meaningful consultation with stakeholders on this
proposal over the last six years.
• In 2016, Health Canada published a White Paper on its proposed Self-Care Framework and
received over 3,500 responses.
• Since then, Health Canada has met with more than 4,500 consumers, academics, health
professionals. Health Canada also held more than 70 one-on-one meetings with industry members, 6
technical sessions, 6 Task Force sessions dedicated to labelling and numerous bilateral meetings with
key industry associations.
• Health Canada formally consulted on proposed regulatory changes published in Canada Gazette,
Part I in June 2021, along with the associated guidance document, and received over 130 submissions.
Most recently, the Department held a stakeholder engagement session to provide updates onkey
changes to the proposal following analysis of the feedback received through this formal consultation
process.
• Stakeholder input has been considered by Health Canada at all stages throughout the
development of this proposal.
Q12. Aren’t new labelling requirements for natural health products going to create unnecessary and
costly burden for industry?
• Labelling is an effective mechanism to protect consumer health and safety. This proposal
ensures that required information is provided in a consistentand common format so that the
information on the label can be understood by the consumer to support safe choice and error-free use.
• The changes will also bring natural health products more in line with requirements for products,
both domestically and internationally–foods, for example, which include a nutrition facts table, and
non-prescription drugs, which include a drug facts table.
• The inclusion of allergens was identified by consumers as one of the most important aspects on
labels. According tofood allergy prevalence estimates, as of April 2020, approximately 2.1 million
Canadians (or 6.1% of the total population) have food allergies.
• Several flexibilities will be introduced in the regulations to minimize burden for industry and
potential impact on the environment, including allowing certain point-of-use information to be moved
to an insert, leaflet or website to avoid the need to increase package sizes to accommodate the changes.
Q13. What regulatory activities specific to advertising weresubject to the audit?
• The audit reviewed Health Canada’s regulatory activities and oversight of advertising of natural
health products targeted to Canadians, which included the Department’s effectiveness in detecting false
and misleading health claims of NHPs on the Canadian market.
Q14. What were the key challenges in regulatory advertising oversight identified by the audit?
• The report indicated that the Department’s monitoring activities were a complaints-based
program, which resulted in the Department’s inability to address high-risk incidents of NHP advertising
claims.
Q15. What were the audit’s key findings related to advertising oversight of NHPs.
• The Department’s monitoring of NHPs focused on reacting to complaints brought to its
attention. When action was taken after an advertising problem was identified, Health Canada’s response
was not always successful in resolving the problem.
• The audit also found that the Department carried out limited monitoring of advertisements
containing misleading information related to high risk claims such as cancer claims.
Q16. What is Health Canada doing to address these gaps/challenges as identified in the audit report?
• The Department has made a commitment in the MRAP to implement a risk-based approach for
advertising oversight of authorized NHPs making unauthorized claims. In September 2021, Health
Canada launched a risk-based approach for advertisingoversight, which supports the Department in
focusing on high-risk advertising incidents that can potentially pose a significant risk to the health and
safety of Canadians.
• Building on successes of the work carried out to support proactive monitoring of advertising of
health products making COVID-19 claims, the Department committed to implement a proactive
monitoring approach to advertising of NHPs. In December 2021, the Department completed a 6-month
pilot using an enhanced artificial intelligence tool, which proactively monitored the internet for NHPs
making cancer claims. Through the results of thispilot the department will design a framework for an
expanded risk-based proactive monitoring program.
• We are also developing for implementation a stakeholder Outreach and Education Strategy for
NHPs.
Q17. What is the status of this commitment?
• InSeptember 2021, Health Canada launched a risk-based approach for advertising oversight,
which supports the department in focusing on high-risk advertising incidents that can potentially pose a
significant risk to the health and safety of Canadians.
• In July 2021, the Department launched a six-month pilot of online proactive monitoring of NHP
advertising making cancer claims using the same tool applied for COVID-19 proactive advertising
monitoring. The pilot came to an end on December 2, 2021.
• The pilot program is currently undergoing an evaluation and the outcome will inform the
expansion and implementation of proactive monitoring program for NHP advertising oversight.
Q18. Canadians rely on Health Canada to ensure that the health products they consume are safe and
effective. The 2021 CESD audit clearly indicates that your department has fallen short of that objective.
What do you say to Canadians about the lack of proper oversight of natural health products, and the
health risk this creates for them?
• Health Canada always takes action when health risks are identified, to protect the health and
safety of Canadians. The Department has already taken concrete steps to address the recommendations
in the audit report and is on track to implement furthermeasures to enhance our current oversight.
• The department identifies potential non-compliance through consumer or industry complaints,
referrals of shipments at the border, international regulatory partners, or proactive compliance
monitoring activitiessuch as market surveys.
• When potential non-compliance is confirmed, Health Canada takes action taken based on the
potential risk to health posed to the public. Actions can include directing companies to correct the
issues, stop sales, recalls, public advisories, product seizures and issuing site and product licence
suspensions.
• In early 2021, Health Canada launched the NHP Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) Pilot to
proactively verify industry compliance with safety and quality requirements through inspections of
licence holders across Canada.
• The Department is on track to conduct stakeholder consultation in order to determine next
steps with regards to a potential permanent inspection program.
Q19. What kind of non-compliance exists at NHP facilities? How serious is it and what is Health Canada
doing about it?
• Issues found at NHP facilities varied in severity and have included:
o Deficient quality assurance processes;
o Insufficient information to determine a product’s expiry date;
o Lack of product testing to demonstrate that it contains what the label says it does;
o Inadequate or no system in place for handling complaints and/or returned goods;
o Deteriorating premises or lack of property maintenance; or,
o Sanitation issues that lead to productcontamination concerns.
• Health Canada’s compliance and enforcement actions are proportional to the level of risk posed
to the public. When possible, companies may be asked to voluntarily correct issues identified during the
site visits before escalatingcompliance and enforcement actions are taken.
• In serious cases, in order to mitigate risk, Health Canada has directed companies to stop selling
products, requested recalls, seized products, issued public communications, and suspend or cancel
product orsite licences.
Q20. How do you address non-compliance? Especially cases of repetitive non-compliance?
• Several compliance and enforcement options are available to correct non-compliance. These
include:
o Suspending or cancelling licences for sites orproducts;
o Directing a stop sale of products;
o Seizing products;
o Requesting voluntary product recalls; and
o Issuing public alerts and advisories on the Health Canada website.
• Repetitive non-compliance is a factor considered when determining the appropriate compliance
and enforcement response. Other factors include the risk to health, the company’s willingness to
comply, compliance history, and any corrective and preventative actions already taken. In all cases,
Health Canada has taken appropriate action to address the risk to human health and safety.
Q21. Natural health products and over-the-counter (OTC) drugs are sold side-by-side on drug store
shelves. To most people, they are indistinguishable. The maximum fine for an infraction is $5,000 for a
NHP and $5 million for an OTC drug. Why such a large difference? Why are the penalties for violations of
the NHP regulations so light?
• When Vanessa's Law was adopted, the legislation imposed tough new penalties for unsafe
drugs, including jail time andnew fines of up to $5 million, instead of $5,000.
• The Department has indicated its intention to bring forward legislative amendments so that
Vanessa's Law powers would apply to NHPs, including tougher fines and penalties that would serve as a
more effective deterrent for non-compliance.
Q22. How many NHP manufacturing facilities are inspected annually? How many of these are planned
inspections versus inspections that respond to industry whistleblowers or informants?
• Historically, the compliance andenforcement approach for NHPs has been largely reactive.
Health Canada can be alerted to potential issues via number of different means, including industry or
consumer complaints.
• When issues are brought to Health Canada’s attention, compliance and enforcement actions can
include such things as virtual or onsite visits. Between April 1, 2021–February 28, 2022, approximately
750 cases were referred to Health Canada. 748 such files involving natural health products were
opened, with varying issues including labelling errors, quality issues and advertising violations.
• Health Canada began bolstering its proactive inspection activity in 2017-18 with a compliance
monitoring project (CMP) that included on-site visits for a subset of NHP facilities to verifycompliance
with select NHPR GMPs. This was followed by CMPs in 2017-18 and 2019-20, each of which included 23
site visits.
• In 2021-22, Health Canada launched an inspection pilot to conduct comprehensive inspections
and verification of the compliance of the Natural Health Products Regulations of 36 site licence holders.
• Health Canada is on track to conduct stakeholder consultation in order to determine next steps
with regards to a potential permanent NHP GMP inspection program in 2023-24, which will increases
NHP oversight and help protect the health and safety of Canadians.
Q23. The audit identified the absence of a routine inspection program as an oversight gap. What steps
has HC taken to address this absence? What future steps HC intends to take andwhen?
• The audit recommended the development of proactive risk-based activities, including
inspections, as part of a more robust post-market compliance and enforcement regime.
• Following an internal evaluation of the Natural Health Products, publishedin 2016, Health
Canada expanded proactive post-market activities, such as conducting on-site inspections. The
department also initiated three compliance monitoring pilot projects (CMPs) for NHP GMP, in 2017-18,
2018-19 and 2019-20, that featured on-site visits for a subset of NHP facilities, with the goal to verify
compliance with selected NHPR GMPs.
• In March 2021, the department introduced a pilot program to inspect 36 NHP facilities and to
promote and verify complianceof the NHP industry in Canada.
• Health Canada is on track to conduct stakeholder consultation in order to determine next steps
with regards to a potential permanent NHP GMP inspection program in 2023-24, which will increases
NHP oversight and help protect the health and safety of Canadians.
Q24. Why does HC not conduct monitoring of all licensed products and manufacturers, given the
potential risk that non-compliance poses to Canadians?
• Health Canada has adopted a risk-based approach to monitoring licensed products. It allocates
moreresources where the risk to the health and safety of Canadians is higher.
• If pressed: Health Canada does not currently impose fees to NHPs and the sites that
manufacture them, to offset the costs of the regulatory activities it carries out on these products and
sites. These activities are funded solely by the department’s operating budget. Health Canada intends to
introduce fees that would offset some of these costs. Introducing such fees would provide the means to
scale-up post-market monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities where needed.
Q25. What is the status of the commitments Health Canada made under the MRAP, related to
compliance and enforcement, specifically:
A. Launch an oversight pilot NHP GMP inspection program by March 2021.
B. Assess the results of the pilot and identify options for a risk-based NHP inspection program,
including full costing, by April 2022.
C. Complete stakeholder consultations on a recommendation for a future risk-based NHP
inspection program by August 2022.
D. Determine next steps to implement an effective risk-based approach to monitoring compliance
and inspections by April 2023.
• A. Launch of oversight pilot inspection program: In March 2021, Health Canada launched the
NHP GMP Pilot to promote and assess industry compliance with quality requirements through routine
inspections of licence holders across Canada. [see Q13]
• B. Assess the results of the pilot and identify options: The department expects to complete pilot
inspections by end of March 2022, and a pilot report will be available in fall 2022. [see Q13]
• C. Complete stakeholder consultations: NHP industry stakeholders have, and continue to be,
engaged through activities such as multilateral meetings, compliance promotion webinars and surveys.
Stakeholder input will help inform next steps for post-market inspection activities related to NHPs.
Health Canada strives to increase oversight in order to reduce health and safety risks for Canadians
while minimizing negative impacts on Industry.
• D. Determinenext steps: Health Canada is on track to conduct stakeholder consultation in order
to determine next steps with regards to a potential permanent NHP GMP inspection program in 2023-
24, which will increases NHP oversight and help protect the health and safety of Canadians.
Q26. Can you describe the key findings of the oversight pilot?
• To date, Health Canada has identified a relatively high rate of non-compliance and a need for
higher industry awareness of regulatory requirements.
• The most common issuesobserved during inspections under the pilot include:
o Inadequate or incomplete finished product specifications available for products;
o The stability program was incomplete or inadequate or there was insufficient stability data to
establish product shelf life;
o The quality assurance person was not adequately trained or released finished product was not
tested according to finished product specifications;
o There was a failure to maintain master production documents at the importing site or evidence
of incomplete records; and,
o There were cases where written standard operating procedures were incomplete or did not
reflect current practices.
o In serious cases, in order to mitigate risk, Health Canada has directed companies to stop selling
products, requested recalls, seized products, issued public communications, and suspend or cancel
product or site licenses
• If pressed: The department identified compliance issues during all 18 inspections of importers,
including:
o Eight cases where compliance issues were serious enough that companies were notified that
Health Canada was considering suspending the site or product licences;
o Four cases where Health Canada directed companies to stop the sale of products;
o Two cases that led to ceasing of importation; and,
o One case where unauthorized claims were made on a product label and company website
(which were corrected by the company).
• If pressed: Compliance issues were also identified at all 14 manufacturer inspections, including:
o Two cases where compliance issues were serious enough that companies were notified that the
department was considering suspending the site or product licences; and,
o One case where the department directed a company to stop the sale of products.
Q27. Why has the department notyet put in place stable funding for the inspection program to address
the audit’s recommendations?
• NHPs are currently the only line of health products in Canada for which all regulatory activities
are funded solely by the department’s operating budget.Health Canada is taking steps introduce cost
recovery fees that would help offset the costs of licensing products and the sites that manufacture
them. Such fees would provide the means to scale-up post-market monitoring, compliance and
enforcement activities.
Q28. Does the department plan to consider some of the lessons learned during the COVID-19 pandemic
to improve the oversight of NHPs?
• Yes, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the department implemented strategies for completing
inspections remotely.Remote inspections were also conducted successfully during the pilot, and the
department is considering a hybrid combination of remote and on-site inspections.
• In addition, the department is conducting an evaluation of the NHP GMP Pilot soliciting
feedback on the following: Whether internal/external stakeholder communications about the pilot were
adequate.
o Findings from this evaluation will allow the department to identify future improvements to the
oversight regime of NHPs.
Q29. How will implementing fees on the Natural Health Products industry contribute to improve the
compliance and enforcement mechanisms to ensure the safety of Canadian consumers?
• The implementation of fees will allow Health Canada to offset the costs of licencing natural
health products and the sites that manufacture them, and provide the means to also scale-up post-
market monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities. This will allow the Department to
strengthen and enhance its compliance and enforcement mechanisms, for example, with the
implementation of a permanent inspection program that will monitor places where natural health
products are manufactured, packaged and labelled to ensure they meet Good Manufacturing Practices
(GMPs).
• Revenues from natural health productfees will help Health Canada step up its compliance and
enforcement activities to reduce illegal NHP activity domestically, including products promoted and sold
online.
• Health Canada is committed to strengthening the oversight of natural health productsthrough
revenues from fees.
Q30. How will Health Canada make sure that the new fees do not become a deterrent for Canadian
innovation in the Natural Health Products industry?
• As pointed out in the recommendations laid in the audit report, Health Canada needs to
strengthen its oversight of the natural health products industry to ensure the safety of Canadian
consumers, making sure that low quality or harmful products are not available on the market. This not
only benefits the health and safety of consumers, but also protects the industry from bad actors that can
damage consumer confidence in the natural health products market. Fees will also act as a deterrent to
companies seeking to manufacture or import these products, who may lack the commitment to meet
the standards to which these products are held.
• Consumers and industry will both benefit from a safer market where consumers trust the
products they purchase.
Q31. If fees to regulate Natural Health Products are implemented, how is Health Canada going to
minimize the impact to small businesses?
• Health Canada has implemented small business mitigation measures in 2020 for the other
health products subject to fees, assisting small business owners by providing discounted fees for
regulatory activities. For example, fees for the review of pre-market submissions are reduced by 50%,
and other fees are reduced by 25%. This confirms the federal government’s commitment to create a
more accessible marketplace where small businesses can remain competitive while meeting their
obligations. The options being explored by Health Canada to introducing fees for Natural Health
Products include small business mitigation strategies.
Q32. The Departmental response to the audit included an indication that it would be seeking Vanessa’s
Law powers for natural health products, despite this not being a recommendation made through the
audit. Why are these measures necessary? Are there gaps in Health Canada’s ability to take action when
safety issues emerge?
• Overall, theaudit confirmed that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention,
appropriate action was taken. However, the audit also noted that compliance could not always be
achieved.
• The audit also acknowledged that Health Canada does not have the authority to order a change
to a label or force a mandatory recall of a natural health product for any reason, including when a
product presents a serious or imminent risk of injury to health.
• In three of the recommendations (2.47 2.51 and 2.), the audit urgedHealth Canada to take steps
to strengthen the department’s ability to deter and address non-compliance. In its response, the
department identified that it would seek to extend to natural health products the authorities already in
place for other health products under Vanessa’s Law.
• Extending these powers to apply to natural health products will improve Health Canada's ability
to collect safety information about products once they are on the market, and take appropriate action
when a serious risk to health is identified. This includes requiring label change/package modifications
and, if needed, the recall of unsafe products. It is important to note that the Department’s intentions in
this area precede the findings of this audit. In fact, as part of broaderconsultations of regulatory
modernization, Health Canada has regularly indicated to stakeholders our intention to pursue this
legislative amendment. The findings of the audit further reinforced the need for Health Canada to take
action in this area.
Q33. According to the timelines set by the Department in the MRAP, you should have already sought
these authorities last fall and would be in the process of consulting stakeholders on the implementation
of these measures. What is the status of Health
Canada’s proposal to extend Vanessa’s Law authorities to apply to natural health products?
• As stated in the audit, Health Canada committed to take steps to propose new tools to
strengthen Health Canada’s ability to deter and address non-compliance which include moving forward
with a proposal to extend the use of Vanessa’s Law powers to NHPs.
• While our initial plan has been to bring this proposal forward last fall as part of a larger
legislative package, this did not advance as planned. We are actively workingto pursue further
opportunities to bring this proposal forward to Parliament for its consideration.
• If pressed on logistics: At this time, the Department is consulting internally to triage a range of
mechanisms available to federal institutions to bringforward legislative amendments of this nature,
with a view identifying the mechanism that will support the timely and efficient adoption of this
recommendation.
Q34. Why did it take a global pandemic for the department to effectively monitor NHPs (e.g.,proactive
monitoring)?
• The department conducted proactive monitoring activities for NHPs well before the COVID-19
pandemic, including three compliance monitoring pilot projects in 2017-18, 2018-19, and 2019-20 (this
last project was completed in March2020).
• The NHP GMP Pilot Inspection Program’s development and implementation was initiated in May
2020, after assessment of the results of the previous compliance monitoring projects and preliminary
results from the audit were available.
Q35. With regards to COVID-19 advertising monitoring, what were the activities reviewed by the CESD
audit during the months of April and May 2020?
• The audit reviewed Health Canada’s proactive monitoring activities of online advertising of
health products (including NHPs) during the months of April and May. Applying a manual approach to
proactive monitoring of advertising, the Department reviewed health product advertising that were
making unsubstantiated claims of the mitigation, prevention, treatment, diagnosis or cure of COVID-19.
Q36. What were the audit findings related to this work carried out starting in April and May?
• The audit found that the department increased its oversight of health product advertising and
found many advertisements making COVID-19claims, on which the Department took action.
Q37. What did the audit recommend?
• The audit found that in spite of increasing its oversight of advertising through proactive
monitoring, NHPs were still making unauthorized claims at the time of the audit,underscoring the need
for the Department to implement a risk-based approach to advertising oversight.
Q38. What other key information should be noted?
• The online proactive monitoring during the months of April and May, was carried out manually.
By July 2021, the department commenced applying an enhanced AI tool for proactive monitoring of
advertisements making COVID-19 claim, leading to a significant increase in activity and non-compliance
detected in comparison to April and May of the same year.
Q39. What actions did Health Canada take to increase the supply of hand sanitizers in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic?
• At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, Health Canada introduced a number of interim policies
and regulatory flexibilities to maximizethe supply of hand sanitizers and disinfectants for Canadians.
These actions included, but were not limited to:
o Accelerating timelines for authorizing hand sanitizers, as well as for issuing site licences for the
manufacture or import of these products.For example, at the outset of the pandemic, expedited
product licensing of 24 hours was put in place (compared to 60 days). The Department closely
monitored the market and returned to standing timelines in July 2020 as supply of hand sanitizers
stabilized.
o Providing flexibilities to acceptable Good Manufacturing Practices–such as accepting those
suitable for food production. This flexibility was lifted in July 2020 as the market continued to stabilize.
o Approving the temporary use of certain authorizedsources technical grade ethanol in the
production of hand sanitizers and disinfectants. We are discontinuing the interim measure as the supply
of ethanol has stabilized and the demand for technical-grade ethanol has decreased, with the final
deadline formanufacturers to stop using technical grade ethanol as of March 31, 2022.
• Health Canada also brought together industry partners through the Hand Sanitizer
Manufacturing Exchange to facilitate the supply of key ingredients and to maximize the domestic
production of hand sanitizers and disinfectants, and companies who do not typically operate in health
product manufacturing such as distilleries, breweries and refineries.
Q40. What activities were reviewed during the audit and what were the key findings related to this
work?
• The audit examined Health Canada’s modified approach to licensing new products and sites for
alcohol-based hand sanitizers in April and May 2020.
• Health Canada’s priority was to address an urgent need in the market for products tohelp limit
the spread of COVID-19,while ensuring consumer safety.
• The audit found that Health Canada exercised due diligence in implementing a risk-based
approach to speed up the licensing of these products, to help limit the spread of COVID-19.
• There were no recommendations made by the auditors related to this work.
Q41. How did Health Canada ensure the safety of hand sanitizers under these interim measures?
• In implementing temporary measures to address hand sanitizer scarcity, the Department
continued to review product applications prior to issuing licences to ensure they met the established
requirements for this type of product.,
• Health Canada closely monitored the market and took necessary compliance and enforcement
action to address identified risks, such as requesting recalls and informing the public in a timely manner
when potential risks were present.
• For example, certain lots of hand sanitizers have been recalled because they did not meet
Health Canada requirements and may pose health risks. These issues have been communicated to
Canadians via our safety alerts on our website.
THE COMMISSIONER OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT’S AUDIT OF THE
NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS PROGRAM
ISSUE
• On April 22, 2021, the Commissioner ofthe Environment and Sustainable Development tabled
an audit report of the Natural Health Products Program. Health Canada agrees with the findings and
recommendations, and is committed to implementing measures to improve the oversight of natural
health products and implement proactive risk-based compliance monitoring activities.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada regulates natural health products sold in Canada to ensure they are safe and
effective. Natural health products include products such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies,
homeopathic products, traditional products (such as traditional Chinese medicines), and probiotics.
Particularly relevant in the context of COVID-19, natural health products also include alcohol-based hand
sanitizers.
• The auditorsmade five recommendations, all of which the Department has accepted. The
recommendations support the direction that the Department has been taking to improve the oversight
of these products.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
• Health Canada recognizes the importance of ensuring that natural health products available for
sale in Canada are safe and effective.
• The audit focussed on natural health products available for sale in Canada to ensure that they
aresafe, effective and accurately represented to consumers.
• The audit found that Health Canada licensed natural health products appropriately, based on
evidence of safety and efficacy prior to licensing. It also found that when an issue was brought to Health
Canada’s attention, immediate action was taken.
• It also concluded that Health Canada acted appropriately to increase the supply of alcohol-based
hand sanitizers in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The audit also identified areas for improvement. Health Canada agrees with the
recommendations from the Commissioner.
• The Department is already working to address all of the recommendations and is taking steps to
accelerate its efforts to strengthen the Natural Health Products Program. This includes increased
oversight of quality, advertising and labelling, enhanced compliance and enforcement efforts, and
ensuring that the department has the tools to protect the health and safety of Canadians when a serious
health risk arises.
IF PRESSED NATURAL HEALTHPRODUCTS ON THE MARKET
• Canada has one of the best regulatory systems in the world for natural health products, with
some of the most stringent requirements.
• For many Canadians, natural health products are an important part of maintaining a healthy
lifestyle.
• While manufacturers are ultimately responsible for ensuring the safety of the natural health
products they sell in Canada, Health Canada assesses the products for safety, efficacy and quality prior
to issuing a license for sale in Canada.
IFPRESSED AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS AND THE DEPARTMENTAL RESPONSE
• The audit recommendations include; increased oversight of the quality of natural health
products, greater monitoring of labels and advertising, improved product labelling, developing a risk-
based inspection program, and introducing proactive risk-based activities for compliance and
enforcement.
• Health Canada’s response focuses on strengthening the oversight of online advertising to ensure
that Canadians have accurate and reliable information to inform their choices, launching an inspection
pilot program intended to inform the development of a permanent inspection program, and bringing
forward a regulatory proposal to improve labelling so product labels are clear, consistent and legible for
consumers.
• The Department will work to ensure it has the tools to protect the health and safety of
Canadians when a serious health risk arises by considering the expansion of Vanessa’s law authorities to
natural health products.
• Health Canada is also working on stabilizing funding by developing a proposal to implement cost
recovery for key regulatory activities related to natural health products in order to sustain increased
oversight of these products, including through inspections of the facilities that make or import them.
IF PRESSED….HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE HEALTH CANADA TO IMPLEMENT THE RECOMMENDED
CHANGES?
• In many of the areas of recommendation, work to address gaps has already begun. For example:
o An inspection pilot program was launched in spring2021 to promote and verify compliance of
site license holders across Canada.
The Department is also expanding its oversight of online advertising of natural health products through
a pilot program to ensure advertisements are providing Canadians with accurate and reliable
information to inform their choices.
o In June 2021, the Department published a regulatory proposal to improve the labelling of
natural health products for consultation, and is currently considering changes to its proposal based on
the feedback received.
• Other elements of the Department’s response will take more time to implement, such as the
Department’s plans to take steps to propose fees for natural health products and expanding Vanessa’s
Law to natural health products. To implement this, the Department will develop a proposal which will be
subject to stakeholder consultation prior to implementation.
BACKGROUND
In 2019, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development (CESD) began an audit of
Health Canada’s Natural Health Products Program. The period covered by the audit is from January 2017
to May 2020. The purpose of the audit was to determine whether Health Canada ensured that natural
health products available for sale in Canada are safe and accurately represented toconsumers. In June
2020, the audit scope was expanded to include Health Canada’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic
specific to the Natural Health Products Program.
Health Canada regulates natural health products sold in Canada to ensure they are safe andeffective.
Natural health products include products such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies, homeopathic
products, traditional products (such as traditional Chinese medicines), and probiotics. Particularly
relevant in the context of COVID-19, natural health products also include alcohol-based hand sanitizers.
The auditors made five recommendations, all of which the Department has accepted. The
recommendations support the direction that the Department has been taking to improve the oversight
of these products. Work to address many of these areas had already begun. The Department has
developed a detailed action plan in response to the audit, which is expected to be implemented over the
next three years.
The Department is committed to addressing the audit findings by implementing measures to improve
the oversight of natural health products, including enhanced enforcement tools and more proactive risk-
based monitoring activities.
Report 2
Reports of the Commissioner of theEnvironment and Sustainable Development to the Parliament of
Canada
Natural Health Products–Health Canada
Independent Auditor’s Report: 2021
2021
Reports of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable
Development to the Parliament of Canada
Independent Auditor’s Report
REPORT 2
Natural Health Products—Health Canada
Performance audit reports
This report presents the results of a performance audit conducted by the Office of the Auditor
General of Canada (OAG) under the authority of the Auditor General Act.
A performance audit is an independent, objective, and systematic assessment of how well government
is managing its activities, responsibilities, and resources. Audit topics are selected on the basis of their
significance. While the OAG may comment on policy implementation in a performance audit, it does not
comment on the merits of a policy.
Performance audits are planned, performed, and reported in accordance with professional auditing
standards and OAG policies. They are conducted by qualified auditors who
• establish audit objectives and criteria for the assessment of performance
• gather the evidence necessary to assess performance against the criteria
• report both positive and negative findings
• conclude against the established audit objectives
• make recommendations for improvement when there are significant differences
between criteria and assessed performance
Performance audits contribute to a public service that is ethical and effective and a government that is
accountable to Parliament and Canadians.
This publication is available on our website at www.oag-bvg.gc.ca.
Cette publication est également offerte en français.
© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, as represented by the Auditor General of Canada, 2021.
Cat. No. FA1-26/2021-1-2E-PDF ISBN 978-0-660-38238-8
ISSN 2561-1801
Cover and title page photos: Life andTimes/Shutterstock.com
Table of Contents
Introduction
Background
Focus of the audit
Findings, Recommendations, and Responses
Safety and efficacy of naturalhealth products
Health Canada did not verify that facilities followed good manufacturing practices
before products arrived on the market
Reliance on manufacturers’ attestations
Health Canada left natural health products unchecked after they entered themarket and was
not always successful in responding to serious problems
Poor information for consumers on licensed products
Limited monitoring of licensed products and manufacturers
Limited monitoring of unlicensed products and unauthorized activities
Partial success in resolving serious problems with products
Health Canada responded effectively to natural health products related to COVID-19
Successful approach for licensing hand sanitizers
Proactive monitoring of COVID-19 product advertising
Conclusion
About the Audit
List of Recommendations
Introduction
Background
Natural health products
2.1 Natural health products are a type of self-care product made from naturally occurring
ingredients and used for general healthmaintenance. Such products include
• vitamins, minerals, and probiotics
• homeopathic medicines
• traditional medicines like Chinese and Ayurvedic (East Indian) medicines that are based on the
theories, beliefs, and experiences of different cultures and used in the ancient practice of medicine for
the maintenance of health
• non-traditional products making health claims, such as claims about managing weight or aiding
sleep
• alcohol-based hand sanitizers
• certain sunscreens, toothpastes, and shampoos withhealth claims
2.2 According to a 2010 public opinion poll on natural health products, about 70% of Canadians
regularly used such products to maintain
their health and prevent minor health problems. In a 2016 survey, more than half of the Canadian
participants said they used vitamins and minerals weekly.
2.3 There is a perception that because natural health products are made from ingredients found in
nature, they are safe. However,
some products can cause negative effects when combined with other medicationsor when not used as
directed. There have been cases
of people experiencing serious and unexpected adverse reactions to authorized and unauthorized
natural health products. Such reactions have included septic shock, jaundice, and disruption of liver
function; some adverse reactions required hospitalization.
2.4 The regulation of natural health products in Canada began in 2004. The federal government
wanted to balance consumer safety with consumers’ freedom of choice and access to traditional
medicines. To be sold in Canada, natural health products must be licensed by Health Canada to ensure
that they are safe and effective. The department considers a natural health product to be safe if its
benefit outweighs
the risk when the product is used as intended andaccording to directions. The department considers a
natural health product to be effective if evidence supports that the product will provide the benefits
described in the claims. Since 2004, Health Canada has issued more than 91,000 licences for natural
health products.
2.5 Natural health products are regulated differently from over-the-counter drugs (manufactured
drugs that can be sold without a prescription) and cosmetics (Exhibit 2.1). They sit side by side in
pharmacies where Canadians most often buythem.
Exhibit 2.1 How natural health products are regulated compared with over-the-counter drugs and
cosmetics
Natural health products
- Accepted ingredients
o Naturally occurring ingredients, their extracts, and synthetic duplicates
- Health claims permitted by Health Canada
o Pain and symptom relief, treatment of certain diseases
- Evidence required to show safety and efficacy
o Scientific evidence from traditional use orhomeopathic prqactices
- Health Canada is notified when a product enters the market
o No
- Health Canada can force a recall
o No
- Health Canada charges product application fees
o No
- Fine issued for violation of the law
o Maximum $5,000
Over-the counter drugs
- Accepted ingredients
o Synthetic ingredients only
- Health claims permitted by Health Canada
o Pain and symptom relief, treatment of certain diseases
- Evidence required to show safety and efficacy
o Scientific evidence
- Health Canada is notified when a product enters the market
o Yes
- Health Canada can force a recall
o Yes
- Health Canada charges product application fees
o Yes: between $1,616 and $400,288
- Fine issued for violation of the law
o Maximum $5,000,000
Cosmetics
- Accepted ingredients
o Natural or synthetic ingredients
- Health claims permitted by Health Canada
o None
- Evidence required to show safety andefficacy
o Evidence may be requested
- Health Canada is notified when a product enters the market
o Yes
- Health Canada can force a recall
o No
- Health Canada charges product application fees
o No
- Fine issued for violation of the law
o Maximum $5,000
Roles and responsibilities
2.6 Health Canada is responsible for administering the Natural Health Products Regulations, which
govern the safety and efficacy of natural health products. Before products go on the market, the
department licenses products and the sites that manufacture them. The department is responsible for
overseeing products and sites after the products appear on the market. However, the primary
responsibility for the safety and efficacy of products and manufacturing sites rests with the industry.
2.7 HealthCanada can enforce product and site-licence conditions for natural health products by,
for example,
• suspending or cancelling licences
• directing a stop sale of products
• seizing products
• requesting voluntary product recalls
• issuing public alertsand advisories on the Health Canada website
2.8 Health Canada does not have the authority to order a change to a label or force a mandatory
recall of a natural health product for any
reason, including when a product presents a serious or imminent risk of injury to health.
Focus of the audit
2.9 This audit focused on whether Health Canada ensured that natural health products available for
sale in Canada are safe and accurately represented to consumers.
2.10 This audit is important because many Canadians use natural health products. They expect these
products to be safe and effective, and they expect to be properly informed about them.
2.11 More details about the audit objective, scope, approach, and criteria are in About the Audit at
the end of this report(see pages 20–23).
Findings, Recommendations, and Responses
Overall message
2.12 Overall, Health Canada’s oversight of natural health products available for sale in Canada fell
short of ensuring that products were safe and effective. The department didapprove products on the
basis of evidence that they were safe and effective. However, gaps in the oversight of manufacturing
sites and in the monitoring of products once on the market left consumers exposed to potential health
and safety risks because products were not always manufactured or marketed according to licence
conditions.
2.13 The absence of routine inspections did not allow Health Canada to ensure that manufacturing
sites were following good manufacturing
practices. The department also did not monitor product label information to ensure that products were
as described on the label or licensed for sale. When licence conditions are not followed, products may
not deliver the promised health benefits or may cause adverse reactions ranging from mild to severe.
Though Health Canada investigated products suspected of causing serious health risks, such as adverse
reactions, and took immediate action to address such risks, the department’s approach was reactive and
not always successful in having all products pulled from the shelves.
2.14 During the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the department successfully modified its
approach to licensing hand sanitizers. This helped to address market shortages of sanitizing products
that curb the spread of thecoronavirus. Health Canada also proactively monitored the advertising of
natural health products making health claims related to COVID-19. It took action when it identified false
claims, though we found that many licensed and unlicensed natural health products were still making
unauthorized claims at the time of the audit.
Safety and efficacy of natural health products
Context
2.15 Natural health products are a subset of drugs under the Food and Drugs Act. They are regulated
by the Natural Health Products Regulations, which govern their manufacturing, packaging, labelling,
importation, distribution, storage, and sale. Every natural health product sold in or imported to Canada
must have a product licence from Health Canada and be manufactured in a facility with a site licence
from
the department.
2.16 Exhibit 2.2 summarizes how Health Canada’s system is designed to issue a natural health
product licence and a site licence for manufacturing natural health products.
Product licensing
- 1. Company has an ideafor a specific natural health product
- 2. Company applies for a product licence
- 3. Company provides evidence to demonstrate that the product contains accepted substances
and to show its safety and efficacy
- 4. Health Canada reviews the application to verifythe product’s safety and efficacy and
determine whether the benefits outweigh the risks
o 5.a Health Canada refuses a product licence
o 5.b Health Canada grants a product licence and issues a natural product number
 6.b The product licence holder must find a site-licence holder to make the
product
 7.b The product in now eligible to be sold in Canada
o 5.c Health Canada requires more information
 6.b Return to step 3: company provides evidence to demonstrate that the
product contains accepted substances and to showits safety and efficacy
- Health Canada monitors the product-licence requirements
Site licensing
- 1. Company wants to legally produce a natural health product for sale in Canada
- 2. Company applies for a site licence
- 3. Company provides information desmonstratig that the facility will meet good manufacturing
practices, such as product testing, and the it can comply with requirements
- 4. Health Canada reviews the company’s application and attestation
o 5.a Health Canada refuses a site licence
o 5.b Health Canada issues a site licence to the manufacturer
 6.b Site-licence holder is now eligible to manufacture the licensed natural health
product
 7.b Manufacturer periodically reapplies to renew the site licence
 8.b Return to stem 3: Company provides informationdemonstrating that the
facility will meet good manufacturing practices, such as product testing, and
that it can comply with requirements
o 5.c Health Canada requires more information
 6.c return to step 3: company provides information demonstrating that the
facility will meet good manufacturing practices, such as product testing, and
that it can comply with requirements
- Health Canada monitors the site-licence requirements
Health Canada did not verify that facilities followed good manufacturing practices before products
arrived on the market
What we found
2.17 We found that Health Canada did not always verify that manufacturing facilities followed good
manufacturing practices before natural health products were marketed for sale in Canada. The
department relied on manufacturers’ attestations that their facilities followed good manufacturing
practices.
2.18 The analysis supporting this finding discusses the following topic:
• Reliance on manufacturers’ attestations
Why this finding matters
2.19 This finding matters because Health Canada is responsible for verifying that natural health
products are made in facilities that follow good manufacturing practices. These practices help ensure
that products are safe and effective as described.
Recommendation
2.20 Ourrecommendation in this area of examination appears at paragraph 2.26.
Analysis to support this finding
Reliance on manufacturers’ attestations
2.21 Health Canada requests that site-licence applicants attest, by means of written declaration, that
they follow good manufacturing practices. We found that the department relied on natural health
product manufacturers’ attestations that their facilities followed these practices and had not conducted
an inspection before the products went on the market. We notedthat the department takes a different
approach with drug manufacturers—that is, it does an initial inspection before those products arrive on
the market. Good manufacturing practices are key controls to ensure that natural health products
• include theright medicinal ingredients at the right dosage
• are free from microbial and chemical contamination
• remain active and stable until their expiry date
• are processed by qualified personnel, using equipment in facilities that follow good sanitation
practices
2.22 We reviewed a sample of 25 (out of 250) active site licences for Canadian manufacturing sites
and foreign sites of Canadian importers that Health Canada approved between 2017 and 2019, along
with their first licence renewal. We examined whether, before products went on the market, Health
Canada had verified that these sites followed good manufacturing practices.
2.23 In 13 of the 25 sites in our sample, Health Canada relied on inspections, such as drug
inspections, performed by domestic and regulatory authorities from other countries when licensing
these sites. However, we found that the department did not have assurance that 10 of these 13 sites
followed good manufacturing practices because the department did not have evidence that these
inspections included the natural health product lines.
2.24 For the remaining 12 sites in our sample, Health Canada obtained some site information before
issuing a licence. However, it did not verify one or more of the following key types of evidence
demonstrating that the sites followed good manufacturing practices:
• evidence that the facility’s quality assurance official had the necessary qualifications
• adequate standard operating procedures for product testing, sanitation, quality assurance,
premises, and equipment
• product testing results showing that the product specifications were met
2.25 Health Canada cannot verify certain good manufacturing practices, such as product testing, until
after production has started. In addition, the department is not told whennatural health products will
be released on the market, unlike for drugs, which the department is notified about when products are
sold. Therefore, Health Canada could not verify that natural health products sold to Canadian consumers
were manufactured insites that complied with good manufacturing practices before they went on the
market.
2.26 Recommendation. Health Canada should obtain
• sufficient evidence to verify that licensed sites follow good manufacturing practices before
products are released onthe market
• information about which natural health products are available on the market
The department’s response. Agreed. Health Canada notes its limited regulatory authorities to compel
companies to provide information on quality as part of the product-licence submission process.
Applicants are required to provide only an attestation that their product will meet the prescribed quality
requirements. To improve its pre-market quality oversight of natural health products, the department
has been using information gathered through 2 compliance monitoring projects and a paper-based audit
of good manufacturing practices at a number of manufacturing sites. The department also
acknowledges that natural health products are the only line of health products for which all regulatory
activities are funded by the public. The absence of a stable funding framework combined with the
limited regulatory authorities for quality has placed significant pressure on the department to perform
its regulatory activities and efficiently respond to the increasingly high number and scientific complexity
of product submissions. In response to this recommendation, the department will
• establish fully costed options for a risk-based approach to quality oversight prior to the issuance
or renewal of licences and determine the full regulatory and operational implications of these options
• explore mechanisms to obtain information about which products are available on the market
• take steps to propose user fees to natural health products to offset the costs of licensing and
post-market activities
Health Canada left natural health products unchecked after they entered the market and was not always
successful in responding to serious problems
What we found
2.27 We found that Health Canada didlittle to prevent poor information from being given to
consumers about licensed natural health products.
It did limited monitoring of licensed products and manufacturers and of unlicensed products, such as
checking whether product labels and advertising contained misleading information. The department’s
monitoring of products focused on reacting to complaints brought toits attention. When it did take
action after finding problems with natural health products, Health Canada’s response was not always
successful in resolving the problems.
2.28 The analysis supporting this finding discusses the following topics:
• Poor information for consumers on licensed products
• Limited monitoring of licensed products and manufacturers
• Limited monitoring of unlicensedproducts and unauthorized activities
• Partial success in resolving serious problems with products
Why this finding matters
2.29 This finding matters because products should not be on the market unless they are safe and the
information provided to consumers is accurate and complete.
Recommendations
2.30 Our recommendations in this area of examination appear at paragraphs 2.35, 2.47, 2.51, and
2.56.
Analysisto supportthis finding
Poor information forconsumers on licensed products
2.31 We examined whether, before approving natural health products, Health Canada ensured that
there was appropriate evidence to demonstrate the products’ safety and efficacy. We found that the
department did approve natural health products according to appropriate safety evidence. The Natural
Health Products Regulations require that this product safety and efficacy information be disclosed on
the product label to help consumers make informed choices. The specific product safety and efficacy
information that must be disclosedto consumers is part of the product’s licence conditions.
2.32 We found that Health Canada did not sufficiently monitor whether product label information
and advertisements met the product-licence conditions. We found that the department monitored
productlabels and advertisements in response to complaints instead of monitoring the market using a
risk-based approach. To gain an understanding
of the market, we examined a sample of 75 licensed products for sale on Canadian websites. We found
that 88% of theseproducts were advertised with misleading product information. Also, 56% of the
products we examined were marketed with misleading label
information—label information that included one or more of the following problems:
• health claims not authorized by Health Canada because they might not have been proven, such
as claims to relieve fatigue, enhance endurance, or burn fat
• an erroneous statement that the product was recommended for children of ages 3 and older
when it was authorized only for adolescents and adults
• an incomplete list of risks and authorized ingredients
• the wrong dosage of medicinal ingredients
• product label information, such as safety warnings, printed very small (that is, in a 4-point font);
on paper, font sizes under 8 points are difficult to read without magnification; according to Health
Canada, poor readability of the printed label information contributes to incorrect product use
In response to our findings, during our audit, Health Canada initiated follow-up on some of the
advertisements and product labels that contained misleading information.
2.33 We also found that more than one quarter of the 75 licensed products that we examined did not
show if they had a natural product number issued by Health Canada. This finding is important because
the department recommends that consumers buy only products
with this number on the label, because it means that the department has assessed these products for
safety and efficacy. Although the regulations require that the natural product number appear on
product labels or packaging, there is no such requirement for the number to appear in online
information.
2.34 Consumers can get information on natural health products from Health Canada’s online
Licensed Natural Health Products Database. We found that the database included all safety information
from the product licences we examined, except for the source of medicinal ingredients and the
recommended duration of use. This safety information is important for consumers to make sure that
they use the products as recommended.
2.35 Recommendation. Health Canada should, for licensed natural health products on the market,
including on the Internet, take a risk-based approach to
• ensure that product labels are readable
• monitor product label andadvertisement information to ensure that they contain accurate and
complete product information, consistent with their licence conditions
The department’s response. Agreed. Health Canada has started to take steps through extensive
stakeholder engagement and the development of a regulatory proposal to improve the labelling of
natural health products, to make them easier to read, understand, and compare with other similar
products. The department will
• continue to pursue regulatory and policy changes to improve labelling of natural health products
• explore options to require licence holders to display a Canadian label, including a natural
product number, in advertisements targeted to Canadians
• take steps to implement a comprehensive proactive monitoring strategy to ensure that
advertising of natural health products is consistent with the product licence
Limited monitoring of licensed products and manufacturers
2.36 We found that Health Canada did not have a program to conduct routine on-site inspections of
manufacturing sites fornatural health products on an established cycle. We noted that health regulatory
agencies in Australia and Europe, for example, have a cycle for conducting routine inspections of
manufacturing sites over a 4-year period.
2.37 We found that Health Canada did identify sites it considered high risk, but it identified only
those that manufactured sterile products, such as eye care products. It did not identify which licensed
sites were making other types of high-risk natural health products, such as:
• products for vulnerable populations, such as children and pregnant or breastfeeding women
• products making claims for specific health conditions, such as diabetes
• products with a compliance history of having substituted ingredients, such as those targeting
weight loss and sexual enhancement
2.38 We found that Health Canada faced challenges in monitoring licensed products in part because
of the large number of licensed products. Since 2004, the department has licensed 91,000 natural health
products, yet by its own estimates, only half of them went to the Canadian market. In addition, the
number of applications for natural health products was 10 times higher than the number for over-the-
counter drugs, and many applications were redundant.Factors that contributed to the large number of
natural health product-licence applications included the following:
• Companies have been able to submit multiple applications for hypothetical products that have
not been developed.
• Applicants have not been required to pay a fee to apply for a product licence or a site licence,
unlike for all other health products regulated by Health Canada.
2.39 We found that Health Canada did not know where all licensed products were manufactured.
Natural health product-licence holders are required to tell the department which licensed facilities
manufactured their products before selling them. However, fewer than 5% of all active product-licence
holders did so. The department did not enforce that requirement or contact product-licence holders to
get the information. In addition, the department was not required to be notified when licensed products
entered and exited the Canadian market. This made it challenging to identify high-risk manufacturing
sites in order to focus its monitoring resources.
2.40 We found that Health Canada did limited monitoring of licensed manufacturers. In 2016, the
department piloted on-site inspections to determine whether the sites followed good manufacturing
practices. Between 2017 and 2019, it inspected around 6% of the 766 activelicensed companies. The
department chose domestic sites either randomly or because they had poor compliance history. It also
chose all sites that manufactured sterile products because they were considered the highest-risk
products. Although Health Canada had information about the type of manufacturing processes at the
sites, it did not have information about the products made at all sites. Therefore, it could not identify
and inspect all high-risk sites.
2.41 When HealthCanada did inspections, there was a high level of industry non-compliance with
product manufacturing and product quality. On-site inspections found product quality problems at all
sites.
In nearly half of the 46 sites it inspected between 2017 and 2019, the department took regulatory action
because it identified significant health risks. Such regulatory actions included cancelling 7 site licences
and suspending or cancelling 5 product licences.
2.42 We examined the files for 7 of the 46 site inspections todetermine whether Health Canada
verified that the companies had corrected the problems it identified before renewing their site licences.
For 2 of the sites, the department determined that the companies did not have an acceptable action
plan and refused to renew their licences. However,
we found that 1 of these companies was still selling its products online without a licence in October
2020.
2.43 In the 5 other site-inspection files, we found that Health Canada verified information supporting
the productexpiry date and certain product testing results. However, we found that it renewed these 5
site licences without verifying that the companies met other important good manufacturing practices,
such as confirming the absence of chemical contaminants.
2.44 Wealso examined a sample of 25 initial site-licence renewals approved by Health Canada after
products were on the market. We found that in 22 of the 25 samples, the department did not verify that
all sites followed good manufacturing practices. Without always verifying that product testing results
meet specifications or that key documented procedures comply with good manufacturing practices, the
department cannot be sure that products were safe and effective. We found that even after their first
site-licencerenewal, most companies still had not demonstrated full compliance with good
manufacturing practices. For example, we found the following:
• Nine companies had one or more incomplete standard operating procedures for product
testing, sanitation, quality assurance, premises, or equipment.
• Seventeen companies did not provide product testing results that confirmed the identity and
quantity of medicinal ingredients, the product expiry date, and the absence of chemicals and microbial
contaminants.
• Seven companies did not provide evidence that their quality assurance official had the necessary
qualifications.
2.45 Health Canada conducted other activities to gather compliance information, which also exposed
quality problems with certain manufacturers. For example, in 2019, the department reviewed 35
companies’ testing results for 2 products that each
company had recently released for sale. The department found problems at all sites, including the use of
expired raw materials, unacceptable amounts of contaminants, and product tests that did not confirm
the product expiry date. For half of the 35 companies, Health Canada took regulatory action, such as
issuing a notice of intent to suspend the site licence, because the problems were serious.
2.46 In our opinion,Health Canada’s findings illustrate the risks of the department relying on
manufacturers to attest that their sites follow good manufacturing practices when it approves site
licences. Some of the department’s findings could have been avoided if the department had performed
more verification of good manufacturing practices when it issued and renewed site licences.
2.47 Recommendation. Health Canada should develop a risk-based monitoring and inspection
program that establishes the scope and frequency of inspections and that considers risks related to
products, sites, and problems raised from its follow-up activities.
The department’s response. Agreed. Health Canada recognizes that natural health products are the only
line of health products for which there isno ability to mandate a recall or to impose terms and
conditions to mitigate safety risks associated with these products. The department has completed a
number of compliance monitoring projects to gather
information on quality oversight of natural health products and recognizes the need to expand its
activities into a more robust inspection program.
The department will
• implement a pilot program for inspecting the good manufacturing practices of natural health
products to promote and verify compliance of the natural health product industry through inspections
of licence holders across Canada and take further actions on the basis of the outcome of this pilot
• take steps to propose new tools to strengthen the department’s ability to deter and address
non-compliance, which include moving forward with a proposal to extend to natural health products the
use of powers under the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law)
• establish fully costed options for a risk-based approach
to inspections
• take steps to propose the expansion of user fees to natural health products to offset the costs of
post-market activities
Limited monitoring of unlicensed products and unauthorized activities
2.48 We found that Health Canada monitored alerts from other international regulators and opened
cases when it became aware of serious issues with a non-compliant product. A non-compliant
product is either an unlicensed product or a licensed product involved in an unauthorized activity. We
found that Health Canada did not
have a program to actively monitor high-risk unlicensed products on the market. Despite a growing
number of such products for sale in Canada, particularly online, the department did little monitoring of
non-compliant products.
2.49 We examined whether Health Canada monitored high-risk products identified by organizations
in Canada and other countries that specialize in testing and label reviews of natural health products.
These products were suspected of containing substituted ingredients or substances such as stimulants
and other toxic substances that could pose serious health risks. We found that Health Canada did not
follow up to determine if any such products were available for sale in Canada with the same substances.
In our review of 61 suspected high-risk products, we found that 38 of them were sold online in Canada
without a product licence.
2.50 Claims to cure and treat cancer are forbidden under the Food and Drugs Act. Some claims of a
product preventing cancer are allowed under the Natural HealthProducts Regulations, subject to a
product’s licence conditions. We reviewed advertisements for 48 products
online that made cancer claims. We found that none of these claims were authorized by Health Canada
and that 4 of these products were not licensed.
2.51 Recommendation. Health Canada should develop a risk-based monitoring program to
• identify unlicensed products and take appropriate action so that they are not available for sale
to consumers in Canada
• identify unauthorized activities and take appropriate action so that labelling and advertisements
meet product-licence conditions
The department’s response. Agreed. Health Canada does maintain a complaint-based program for
regulatory advertising compliance oversight but recognizes that an additional risk-based approach is
required to ensure unauthorized activities are prevented or stopped. The
department will
• implement a risk-based approach to monitoring advertising
Unlicensed product—A natural health product that is available for sale but does nothave a product
licence from Health Canada.
Unauthorized activity—A labelling or advertising activity for a licensed natural health product from
Health Canada that does not meet regulatory requirements.
• take steps to propose new tools to strengthen itsability to deter and address non-compliance,
which include moving forward with a
proposal to extend to natural health products the use of powers under the Protecting Canadians from
Unsafe Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law)
Partial success in resolving serious problems with products
2.52 Natural health product-licence holders are required to report serious adverse reactions to
Health Canada under the Natural Health Products Regulations. Other groups—such as hospitals and the
public—can file a complaint when a licensed or unlicensed product is suspected of causing an adverse
reaction, such as a serious health effect or disability. In response to these reports, the department will
open a
case to investigate products suspected of posing a serious health risk. Between2017 and 2019, the
department opened a total of 40 cases—each case involved one or more products.
2.53 In most of the cases that we reviewed, when Health Canada found serious problems, such as
product-or site-quality issues or adverse reactions involvinghospitalization, we found that it initiated
immediate action to address serious health risks. The department responded by communicating with
the public, for example, and where necessary,
by taking enforcement actions. These enforcement actions included directing a stop sale of products
and requesting a voluntary product recall. Health Canada’s actions successfully got the products off the
market in 36 of the 40 total cases of serious health risks. However, on average, it took close to 3 months
for the department to verify that these products were no longer marketed for sale. For voluntary recalls,
it took around 6 months to verify that product recalls were completed.
2.54 For the other 4 cases of products with serious health risks, the department’s actionswere not
successful in getting them off the market for one of the following reasons:
• The company did not comply with the department’s notice of seizure. (Exhibit 2.3 details the
department’s actions in this case.)
• The department did not receive sufficient information to demonstrate that the recalled
products had been recovered, destroyed, or removed from the market.
• The department did not receive sufficient information to demonstrate that the company had
stopped the sale and import of the products andhad disposed of all products from its inventory.
• The Internet domain hosting the advertising did not comply with the department’s request to
remove the advertising for the unlicensed product.
Exhibit 2.3 Health Canada was not able to have a natural health product containing pharmaceutical
ingredients removed from the market
The following is the timeline of Health Canada’s response to a reported health problem in 1 case
involving 3 related products that were sold by 1 importer.
Action taken by Health Canada or by the importer
- April 2017:Adverse reaction report—Health Canada received an adverse reaction report
involving hospitalization of a person who took 1 or more of these 3 products. The report
included testing results from a poison centre that foundthat the products contained
pharmaceutical ingredients that could cause miscarriages.
- May 2017:Product seizure—The department placed the 3 products under seizure from the
Canadian facility where they were stored.
- August 2017:Product testing—Afterin-depth product testing, the department found that 1 of
the 3 products (“product A”) contained pharmaceutical ingredients that could cause
miscarriages and birth defects.
- October 2017:Voluntary recall request—The department requested that the importer recall
product A.
- November 2017:Border alert and public advisory—The department issued a border alert to
prevent the importation of product A. It also issued a public advisory.
- December 2017:Unannounced on-site visit—The department did an unannounced visitto the
facility. It found that some quantities of the products under seizure had been removed from the
facility. The department immediately suspended the 3 product licences.
- January 2018:Importer’s acknowledgement of possible product contamination—The importer
acknowledged the possibility that these products had been contaminated with pharmaceutical
ingredients that could cause miscarriages and birth defects.
- June 2018:Cancellation and lifting of suspension of licences—Health Canada cancelled the
productlicence for product A and lifted the suspension of the other 2 product licences.
- October 2018:Continued marketing of product online—Product A was still marketed for sale on
the company’s Canadian website despite the product being unlicensed.
2.55 As ofOctober 2020, we found that products in 2 of these 4 cases involving serious health risks
were still marketed for sale online by the same retailer. In addition, of the products in the 36 cases that
Health Canada successfully got off the market between 2017 and 2019, the products in 7 of these cases
had re-entered the market.
2.56 Recommendation. Health Canada should, in cases of products suspected of causing serious
health risk, obtain the information it needs to verify and ensure that these products are not available for
sale to consumers in Canada.
The department’s response. Agreed. In addition to the immediate steps Health Canada already takes to
protect the health and safety of Canadians when a serious risk to health is identified, the department
will
• take steps to propose new tools to strengthen its ability to deter and address non-compliance,
which include moving forward with a proposal to extend to natural health products the use of powers
under the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law)
• take steps to propose the expansion of user fees to natural health products to offset the costs of
licensing and post-market activities
Health Canada responded effectively to natural health products related to COVID-19
What we found
2.57 We found that Health Canada used a risk-based approach to speed up the licensing of the
applications it received in spring 2020 for products to help limit the spread of COVID-19. The
department put
in place effective temporary measures to meet the urgent needfor products facing shortages, such as
alcohol-based hand sanitizers. The department provided flexibility to Canadian manufacturers by
temporarily waiving compliance with specific regulatory requirements
without increasing the risk of serious safety concerns. The department also increased its oversight of the
products marketed for COVID-19.
2.58 The analysis supporting this finding discusses the following topics:
• Successful approach for licensing hand sanitizers
• Proactive monitoring of COVID-19 productadvertising
Why this finding matters
2.59 This finding matters because Health Canada needed to address an urgent need in the market for
COVID-19 products while ensuring consumer safety.
Recommendations
2.60 We made no recommendations in this area ofexamination.
Analysis to support this finding
Successful approach for licensing hand sanitizers
2.61 In spring 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic created shortages of products in Canada, such as
alcohol-based hand sanitizers to curb the spread of the virus. To meet the urgent need for these
products, some of which are considered natural health products, Health Canada made temporary
regulatory and policy changes to speed up their licensing. The interim measures gave flexibility to
Canadian manufacturers by waivingcompliance with a few regulatory requirements during a short
period of time while maintaining due care for safety.
2.62 We found that Health Canada exercised due diligence in implementing a risk-based approach for
licensing new sites, which helped to deliver on the increased demand for hand sanitizers. Although the
department’s approach was practical in the circumstances, in our view the Minister of Health should
have made an interim order under section 30.1 of the Food and Drugs Act and tabled it in Parliament.
Such an interim order would have been the proper way to proceed for temporarily waiving and changing
mandatory regulatory requirements. We noted that the department made such interim orders for
regulatory changes for other health products used during the COVID-19 pandemic, but not for natural
health products.
2.63 During April and May 2020, Health Canada approved more than 2,500 natural health product
licences for hand sanitizers.
On 13 July 2020, the department cancelled some of the interim measuresand resumed its normal
licensing process because it had evidence that manufacturers had the capacity to meet the demand for
the upcoming year.
Proactive monitoring of COVID-19 product advertising
2.64 During April and May 2020, Health Canada proactivelymonitored the advertising of many types
of natural health products to ensure they did not claim to mitigate, prevent, treat, diagnose, or cure
COVID-19. The department found a total of 80 such instances, including false claims that some
mushrooms would prevent COVID-19 and boost the immune system and that oil of oregano stopped the
growth of multiple bacteria. Health Canada resolved many of these instances by contacting the
companies and working with them to remove the advertising. We looked at a sample of25 of these
advertisements and found that 3 of them were still online at the time of the audit despite Health
Canada’s efforts.
2.65 At the same time that Health Canada was monitoring the online market, we also searched
Canadian websites to determine whether products were making claims to prevent COVID-19 or protect
against it or were making unauthorized antiviral claims. We examined 30 websites that advertised such
products and found that 25 of them made unauthorized claims. Although the department actively
monitored the COVID-19 market, we found that many licensed and unlicensed natural health products
were still making unauthorized claims at the time of the audit. In a pandemic, it is even more important
that consumers use only products that have been licensed by Health Canada. As we stated in our
recommendation in paragraph 2.51, a risk-based monitoring program to identify unauthorized activities
and take appropriate action would ensure that misleading information is not marketed to consumers in
Canada.
Conclusion
2.66 We concluded that Health Canada did not ensure that natural health products offered to
Canadians were safe, effective, and accurately represented on the basis of appropriate evidence. The
department approved products on the basis of evidence that they were safe and effective. However, its
oversight of manufacturing sites and monitoring of products once on the market left consumers
exposed to potential health and safety risks because products were not always manufactured or
marketed according to licence conditions. Although Health Canada investigated products that were
suspected of causing serious health risks and took immediate action to address such risks, the
department’s approach was reactive and not always successful in having the products pulled from the
shelves.
2.67 During the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, Health Canada acted quickly to license
alcohol-based hand sanitizers to help address market shortages. The department proactively monitored
natural health products that had claims related to COVID-19 and took action when it identified false
claims. Despite the department’s proactive monitoring, natural health products were still making
unauthorized claims at the time of the audit.
About the Audit
This independentassurance report was prepared by the Office of the Auditor General of Canada on
natural health products. Our responsibility was to provide objective information, advice, and assurance
to assist Parliament in its scrutiny of the government’s management of resources and programs, and to
conclude on whether Health Canada’s oversight of natural health products complied in all significant
respects with the applicable criteria.
All work in this audit was performed to a reasonable level of assurance in accordancewith the Canadian
Standard on Assurance Engagements (CSAE) 3001—Direct Engagements, set out by the Chartered
Professional Accountants of Canada (CPA Canada) in the CPA Canada Handbook—Assurance.
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada applies the Canadian Standard on Quality Control 1 and,
accordingly, maintains a comprehensive system of quality control, including documented policies and
procedures regarding compliance with ethical requirements, professional standards, and applicable legal
and regulatory requirements.
In conducting the audit work, we complied with the independence and other ethical requirements of the
relevant rules of professional conduct applicable to the practice of public accounting in Canada, which
are founded on fundamental principles of integrity, objectivity, professional competence and due care,
confidentiality, and professional behaviour.
In accordance with our regular audit process, we obtained the following from entity management:
• confirmation of management’s responsibilityfor the subject under audit
• acknowledgement of the suitability of the criteria used in the audit
• confirmation that all known information that has been requested, or that could affect the
findings or audit conclusion, has been provided
• confirmation that the audit report is factually accurate
Audit objective
The objective of this audit was to determine whether Health Canada ensured that natural health
products offered to Canadians are safe and accurately represented on the basis of appropriate evidence.
Scope and approach
We examined Health Canada’s pre-market licensing for approving the sale of natural health products
and post-market activities for monitoring industry compliance and product risks and issues. When the
COVID-19 pandemic started, we expanded our audit scope to cover the department’s licensing and
product monitoring targeted to COVID-19.
In pre-market licensing, we examined product and site licensing to determine whether Health Canada
obtained adequate evidence that natural health products are safe, accurately represented, and of
quality before they enter the market. In post-market monitoring, we examined whether Health Canada’s
oversight was sufficient to determine industry compliance with the Natural Health Products Regulations
and whether the department took actions to mitigate higher health risks and problems.
The following areas were excluded from the audit:
• compounding of natural health products by health care professionals
• other health care products, such as supplemented food, consumer products, cosmetics, and
pharmaceutical drugs
• classification of self-care products
• the Self-Care Framework
• substances in Schedule 2 of the Natural Health Products Regulations
We examined a sample of product licences approved in 2018 and 2019 and site licences approved
between 2017 and 2019, along with their first licence renewals, and health risks and problems with
natural health products that were raised during that period. We also examined the department’s
modified approach to licensing new products and sites for hand sanitizers in April and May 2020 and
Health Canada’s monitoring of the market during that period.
Criteria
We used the following criteria to determine whether Health Canada ensured that natural health
products offered to Canadians are safe and accurately represented on the basis of appropriate evidence:
- Criteria:Health Canada approves natural health products that are safe and free from false or
misleading information, on the basis of appropriate evidence.
o Source: Food andDrugs Act
o Natural Health Products Regulations
o Compendium of Monographs, Health Canada, 2013
o Pathway for Licensing Natural Health Products Used as Traditional Medicines, Health
Canada, 2012
o Pathway for Licensing Natural Health Products Making Modern HealthClaims, Health
Canada, 2012
o Evidence for Homeopathic Medicines, Health Canada, 2015
o Natural Health Products Management of Applications Policy, Health Canada, 2019
- Criteria:Health Canada assesses that manufacturers and foreign sites of importers comply with
key good manufacturing practices before the natural health product enters the Canadian
market.
o Sources: Natural Health Products Regulations
o Good Manufacturing Practices Guidance Document, Health Canada, 2015
o Quality of Natural Health Products Guide, Health Canada, 2015
- Criteria:Health Canada’s level of oversight is sufficient to conclude on industry compliance with
the Natural Health Products Regulations to fulfill its regulatory responsibilities.
o Sources: Natural Health Products Regulations
o Site Licensing Guidance Document, Health Canada, 2015
o Compliance and Enforcement Policy for Health Products, Health Canada, 2005 and 2018
o OECD Best Practice Principles for Regulatory Policy: Regulatory Enforcement and
Inspections, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2014
o Manufacturer Inspections: A Risk-Based Approach to Frequency, Department of Health,
Therapeutic Goods Administration, Australian Government, 2016
o Guideline on Good Pharmacovigilance Practices, Module III—Pharmacovigilance
inspections, European Medicines Agency and Heads of Medicines Agencies, 2014
- Criteria:Health Canada monitors Canadian markets to identify unauthorized natural health
products and false or misleading advertisements or product labels, or both.
o Sources: Food and DrugsAct
o Natural Health Products Regulations
- Criteria:Health Canada takes timely actions in response to unauthorized natural health products
and licensed products that contain false or misleading product labels or pose health risks to
consumers
o Sources: Foodand Drugs Act
o Natural Health Products Regulations
o Compliance and Enforcement Policy for Health Products, Health Canada, 2005 and 2018
Period covered by the audit
The audit covered the period from February 2017 to December 2019 for all of the auditcriteria. This is
the period to which the audit conclusion applies. However, to gain a more complete understanding of
the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on natural health products, we also examined new product and
site licences approved in April and May2020 and the online marketing of natural health products during
those 2 months.
Date of the report
We obtained sufficient and appropriate audit evidence on which to base our conclusion on 3 December
2020, in Ottawa, Canada.
Audit team
Principal: Heather Miller
Director: Lucie Talbot
Erin Brown
Audrey Garneau
Aliya Haji
Ashley Urban
Leendert van Beerschoten
List of Recommendations
The following table lists the recommendations and responses found in this report. The paragraph
number preceding the recommendation indicates the location of the recommendation in the report,
and the numbers in parentheses indicate the location of the related discussion.
- Safety and efficacy of natural health products
o Recommendation
 2.26 Health Canada should obtain
 Sufficient evidence to verify that licensed sites follow good manufacturing
practices before products are released on the market
 Information about which natural health products are available on the market
 2.21-2.25
o Response
 The department’s response. Agree. Health Canada notes its limited regulatory
authorities to compel companies to provide information on quality as part of
the product-licence submission process applicants are required to provide only
an attestation that their product will meet the prescribed quality requirements.
To improve its pre-market quality requirements. To improve its pre-market
quality oversight of natural health products, the department has been using
information gathered through 2 compliance monitoring projects and a paper-
basedaudit of good manufacturing practices at a number of manufacturing
sites. The department also acknowledges that natural health products are the
only line of health products for which all regulatory activities are funded by the
public. The absence of a stable funding framework combined with the limited
regulatory authorities for quality has placed significant pressure on the
department to perform its regulatory activities and efficiently respond to the
increasingly high number and scientific complexity of product submissions. In
response to this recommendation, the department will
 establish fully costed options for a risk-based approach to quality oversight prior
to the issuance or renewal of licences and determine the full regulatory and
operational implications of these options
 explore mechanisms to obtain information about which products are available
on the market
 take steps to propose user fees to natural health products to offset the costs of
licensing and post-market activities
o Recommendation
 2.35Health Canada shoul, for licensed natural health products on the market,
incluing on the Internet, take a risk-based approach to
 Ensure that product labels are readable
 Monitor product label and advertisement information to ensure that they
contain accurate andcomplete product information, consistent with their
licence conditions
 2.31-2.34
o Response
 The department’s response. Agreed. Health Canada has started to take steps
through extensive stakeholder engagement and the development of a regulatiry
proposal to improve the labelling of natural health products, to make them
easier to read, understand, and compare with other simila products. The
department will
 Continue to pursue regulatory and policy changes to improve labelling
of natural health products
 explore options to require licence holders to display a Canadian label,
including a natural product number, in advertisements targeted to
Canadians
 take steps to implement a comprehensive proactive monitoring strategy
to ensure that advertising of natural healthproducts is consistent with
the product licence
o recommendation
 2.47 HealthCanada should develop a risk-based monitoring and inspection
program that establishes the scope and frequency of inspections and that
considers risks related to products, sites, andproblems raised from its follow-up
activites
 2.36-2.46
o Response
 The department’s response. Agree. Health Canada recognizes that natural
health products are the only line of health products for which there is no ability
to mandate a recall or to impose terms and conditions to mitigate safety risks
associated with these products. The department has completed a number of
compliance monitoring projects to gather information on quality oversight of
natural health products and recognizes the need to expand its activities into a
more robust inspection program. The department will
 implement a pilot program for inspecting the good manufacturing
practices of natural health products to promote and verify compliance
 of the natural health product industry through inspections of licence
holders across Canada and take further actions on the basis of the
outcome of this pilot
 take steps to propose new tools to strengthen the department’s ability
to deter and address non-compliance, which include moving forward
with a proposal to extend to natural health products the use of powers
under the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law)
 establish fully costed options for a risk-based approach to inspections
 take steps to propose the expansion of user fees to natural health
products to offset the costs of post-market activities
o recommendation
 2.51 Health Canada should develop a risk-based monitoring program to
 Identify unlicensed products and take appropriate action so that they
are not available for sale to consumers in Canada
 Identify unauthorized activities and take appropriate action so that
labelling and advertisements meet product-licence conditions
 2.48-2.5
o Response
 The department’s response. Agreed. Health Canada does maintain a complaint-
based program for regulatory advertising compliance oversight but recognizes
that an additional risk-based approach is required to ensure unauthorized
activities are prevented or stopped. The department will
 Implement a risk-based approach to monitoring advertising
 Take steps to propose new tools to strengthen its ability to deter and
address non-compliance, which include moving forward with a proposal
to extend to natural health products the use of powers under the
Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law)
 Recommendation
 2.56 Health Canada should, in cases of products suspected of causing
serious health risk, obtain the informationit needs to verify and ensure
that these products are not available for sale to consumers in Canada
 2.52-2.55
 Response
 The department’s response. Agreed. In addition to the immediates
steps Health Canada already takes to protect the health and safety of
Canadians when a serious risk to health is identified, the department
will
o Take steps to propose new tools to strengthen its ability to
deter and address non-compliance, which include moving
forward with a proposal to extend to natural health products to
use of powers under the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe
Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law)
o Take steps to propose the expansion of user fees to natural
health products to offset the costs of licensing and post-market
activities
Survey Results on Natural Health Products
As part of our audit work, we asked Canadians about their experiences with natural health products.
These are the results of that survey.
- Do you believe that the Government of Canada assesses all natural health products sold in
Canada for both safety and efficacy
o Yes: 25%
o No: 75%
- How much do you trust the advertising for natural health products
o Very much trust: 6%
o Moderately trust: 13%
o Neither trust nor distrust: 13%
o Moderately distrust: 23%
o Very much distrust: 45%
- How easy is it to read natural health product labels
o Minimally easy
- In order of importance, which factors most influence your decision to purchase natural health
products?
o Very important to not important
 A credible source that indicates that the product has benefits
 Label information
 Recommended use
 Where the product is made
 Statements about health benefits
 Advertising
 Other
 Recommendations from social media
- Where do you most often purchase your natural health products?
o Dollar stores and other discount retailers: 0%
o Online: non-Canadian retailers: 2%
o Health care professionals: 3%
o Online: Canadian retailers: 4%
o Large retail and grocery stores: 16%
o Storesspecializing in natural health products: 24%
o Pharmacies: 51%
- Have you purchased any natural health products to help prevent or treat COVID-19
o Yes: 14%
o No: 86%
- 99% of respondents were Canadian residents
These results are based on an internet plll that appeared on the OAG internet page. They are not
intended to be statistically representative of all consumers but rather represent only these views on the
respondents themselves.
Communications Approach
Natural Health Product Program Audit
Communications Sensitivity Level: MEDIUM
LOW: Little to no file sensitivities, minimal risk concerns, or factual in nature, or expected to generate a
neutral to positive response from the audience.
MEDIUM: Some sensitivity or complexity to the issue or initiative, and a heightened risk perception.
Scrutiny from certain audiences is possible.
HIGH: Sensitive file or issue, and/or high-risk perception, and/or complex in nature. Significant
stakeholder or media reaction is possible.
ISSUE
This spring, the Auditor General of Canada will release its audit of the Natural Health Products Program.
The focus of the audit was to determine whether the Department ensures that the natural health
products available for sale in Canada are safe and accurately representedto consumers.
The key findings of the report were:
• Health Canada approved NHPs based on evidence that they were safe and effective,
• some gaps in oversight of quality and monitoring of marketed NHPs were identified, and
• Health Canada’s COVID-19 response to ensure the supply of hand sanitizers was successful.
In response to the recommendations put forward, Health Canada, is preparing a plan to put in place a
stronger and more robust Natural Health Products Program. This includes the introduction of legislative
and regulatory changes, as well as enhanced compliance and enforcement efforts, including the use of
proactive monitoring.
STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS
- Health Canada may not have enough resources to undertake all of the activities outlined in its
response to the recommendations
o Mitigation strategy: As part of the Management Response and Action Plan (MRAP), the
Department is proposing a new cost recovery measure that could add financial
resources to its efforts in the future.
In the meantime, theMRAP will address what tasks are required as well as what
resources are necessary to accomplish them. The Department will take a scalable
approach that is dependant on resources and outcomes. Media lines will address this.
- Stakeholders may not respond positively to new strengthen regulatory, compliance and
enforcement and cost recovery measures
o Mitigation strategy: Program will proactively engage stakeholders to communicate the
objectives of these measures, which is to better protect the health and safety of
Canadians. Communications will emphasize that additional oversight will be
advantageous for compliant companies and will also respond to previous calls from
stakeholders for stronger action to address non-compliance.
Program will also give stakeholdersthe opportunity to provide feedback on both the
new regulatory measures and proposed fees through consultations.
The natural health products industry has been very publicly vocal of its concerns
regarding regulatory changes in the past.
Communications willdevelop robust Media Lines / Q&As to address possible questions
and concerns, and may consider other proactive communications strategies, if
necessary.
- Consumers of natural health products may become apprehensive about taking natural health
products, while others may doubt the validity of the report’s findings
o Mitigation strategy: Public outreach initiatives, including social media posts, will
reiterate Health Canada’s efforts to protect health and safety as well as educating
consumers to make informed natural health product choices by reading labels
AUDIENCE
• Stakeholders and Industry
• General Public (outreach initiatives–following tabling)
OBJECTIVES
• Demonstrate Health Canada’s commitment to helping Canadians maintain and improve their
health, including through the effective oversight of natural health products.
• Communicate Health Canada’s role and responsibilities in the health and safety of natural health
products.
• Respond to potential questions and concerns regarding Health Canada’s proposedmeasures,
and demonstrate their value and necessity.
• Help consumers of natural health products make informed choices about the products they use.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada recognizes the importance of NHPs for the health of Canadians.
• Protecting the health and safety of Canadians is Health Canada’s top priority.
• Health Canada is committed to implementing measures to improve the oversight of NHPs and
implement proactive risk-based activities.
• The Department understands the importance of naturalhealth products for Canadians and is
preparing a plan to put in place a stronger and more robust Natural Health Products, including increased
oversight of their quality, advertising and labelling.
• In early 2021, Health Canada implemented the Natural Health Products Good Manufacturing
Practices inspection pilot to promote and verify industry compliance through routine inspections of
licence holders across Canada.
• Health Canada’s recommendations in response to the CESD report are as follows:
o Strengthening its oversight of the online advertising of natural health products to ensure they
provide Canadians with accurate and reliable information to inform their choices.
o Bringing forward a regulatory proposal to improve the labelling of natural health products to
ensure information on the product label is clear, consistent and legible for consumers.
o Pursuing additional post-market powers, including mandatory recall powers, to ensure it has the
necessary tools to protect the health and safety of Canadians when a serious health risk arises.
o Working on establishing a user-fee program for natural health products to sustain increased
oversight for these products as it already does for other health products.
ROLLOUT PLAN
• Final CESD report is expected to be tabled in Parliament Spring 2021. Health Canada is
recommending a low profile approach to accompany the release of the report as the subject matter of
the audit mainly impacts stakeholders and industry.
RECOMMENDED TACTICS
Before tabling
• Media Lines / Q&As
After tabling
• Web, public outreach and social media content that focuses on encouraging informed decisions
and safe use by consumers including:
o Reading labels and making informed purchasing choices (especially online)
EVALUATION
• Web and social media analytics
APPROVALS & CONSULTATIONS
Amanda Moir, Director, NNHPD (reviewed/commented, 2021-03-04)
Hamida Rahim, Director, HPFB (reviewed/commented, 2021-03-04)
Alain Lumbroso, Director, HPFB (reviewed/commented, 2021-03-04)
Mary Morgan, A/Director, ROEB (reviewed/commented, 2021-03-04)
Natalie Page (DG, NNHPD) (approved, 2021-03-08)
Kelly Robinson (DG, MHPD) (approved, 2021-03-09)
Shannon Laforce for Etienne Ouimette (DG, RMOD) (approved, 2021-03-08)
Linsey Hollett (DG, ROEB) (approved, 2021-03-09)
Marilyne Nahum, Communications Executive (approved, 2021-03-09)
Cathy Lafkas, CPAB Director (approved, 2021-03-10)
Sara MacKenzie, CPAB DG (FYI)
Program & CPAB ADMs (FYI)
Media Lines
Natural Health Product Program Audit
Issue Statement:
On April 22,2021, at 10 a.m. EDT, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable
Development will table an audit report of the Natural Health Products Program. The focus of the audit
was to determine whether Health Canada ensures that the natural health productsavailable for sale in
Canada are safe and accurately represented to consumers. In response to the recommendations in the
report, Health Canada is preparing a plan to establish a stronger and more robust Natural Health
Products Program. This may include the proposal of legislative and regulatory changes, as well as
enhanced compliance and enforcement efforts, including a greater use of proactive monitoring.
Key Messages:
- Health Canada recognizes the importance of ensuring that natural health products available for
sale in Canada are safe and effective.
- Overall, the audit by the Auditor General of Canada of the Natural Health Products Program
identified both strengths and areas for improvement within the Program.
- It is worth noting that the audit found thatHealth Canada licensed natural health products
appropriately, based on evidence of safety and efficacy.
- It also concluded that Health Canada acted appropriately to successfully increase the supply of
alcohol-based hand sanitizers in response to theCOVID-19 pandemic.
- In response to the audit recommendations, Health Canada is preparing a plan to establish a
stronger and more robust Natural Health Products Program, including increased oversight of
quality, advertising and labelling.
- Health Canada’s response to the audit recommendations include:
o Strengthening the oversight of online advertising of natural health products to ensure that
Canadians have accurate and reliable information to inform their choices.
o Bringing forward a regulatory proposal toimprove the labelling of natural health products
to ensure information on product labels is clear, consistent and legible for consumers.
o Considering additional post-market powers, including mandatory recall powers, to ensure
Health Canada has the tools to protect the health and safety of Canadians when a serious health risk
arises.
o Working on stabilizing funding by developing a proposal to charge fees to industry for key regulatory
activities related to natural health products in order to sustain increased oversight of these products,
including through inspections of the facilities that make or import them.
- In early 2021, Health Canada launched the Natural Health Products Good Manufacturing
Practices Inspection Pilot to promote and verify industry compliance with quality requirements through
routine inspections of licence holders across Canada. The results ofApril 12, 2021 this pilot will inform
next steps for post-market inspection activities related to natural health products (NHPs).
Principaux messages:
- Santé Canada reconnait l’importance de veiller à ce que les produits de santé naturels envente
au Canada sont sûrs et efficaces.
- En général, la vérification du Programme des produits de santé naturels effectué par la
vérificatrice générale du Canadaa révélé les points forts et les points à améliorer du
programme.
- Il convient de noter que la vérification a révélé que Santé Canada a homologué des produitsde
santé naturels de façon appropriée, selon des preuves en matière d’innocuité etd’efficacité.
- Il convient de noter que la vérification a révélé que Santé Canada a homologué des produitsde
santé naturels de façon appropriée, selon des preuves en matière d’innocuité etd’efficacité.
- Pour donner suite aux recommandations découlant de la vérification,Santé Canada prépareun
plan qui permettra de solidifier le Programme des produits de santé naturels, quicomprend une
surveillance accrue en matière de qualité, de publicité et d’étiquetage.
- En réponse aux recommandations, Santé Canada suggère :
o Améliorer la surveillance de la publicité enligne sur les produits de santénaturels afin de s’assurer que
les Canadiens disposent de renseignementsprécis et fiables qui éclaireront leurs choix.
o Présenter une proposition réglementaire qui vise à améliorer l’étiquetage des produits de santé
naturels, afin d’assurerque les renseignements sur lesétiquettes sont clairs, cohérents et lisibles pour
les consommateurs.
o Acquérir des pouvoirs supplémentaires aprèsla mise en marché, tels que lepouvoir d’effectuer des
rappels obligatoires; Santé Canada disposera ainsi desoutils nécessaires à la protection de la santéet la
sécurité des Canadienslorsqu’une menace à la santé survient.
o Stabiliser le financement par l’entremise de frais imputés à l’industrie en matièred’activités clés en
réglementation liées aux produits de santé naturels, afin demaintenir la surveillance accrue des
produits,notamment par l’inspection desinstallations qui les fabriquent ou qui les importent.
Questions and Answers:
Q1. Are thenatural health products on the market safe to use?
For many Canadians, natural health products are an important part of maintaining a healthy
lifestyle. While manufacturers are ultimately responsible for ensuring the safety of the natural health
productsthey sell in Canada, Health Canada regulates these products so that Canadians can have
confidence that the products they use are safe, effective and of high quality. April 12, 2021
Through is regulatory role, Health Canada provides oversight for safety, efficacy and quality for natural
health products (NHPs). Before products can be sold in Canada, products are assessed by Health Canada
before a licence is provided. This assessment includes a review of the types of ingredients, dosage, and
health claims, todetermine if the product can be safely used by consumers. While the audit identified
areas for improvement, it is important to note that, overall, Health Canada’s approach to assessing
safety and efficacy of NHPs prior to licensing is appropriate. The audit also found that when an issue was
brought to Health Canada’s attention, the Department took appropriate action to mitigate any risks to
Canadians.
Q2. What findings and recommendations did the audit report include, and how is the
Department responding?
Areas of strength
- The audit found that Health Canada licensed natural health products (NHPs) appropriately,
based on evidence of safety and efficacy.
- The audit also found that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention, appropriate
action wastaken.
- Additionally, the audit established that Health Canada’s approach to increase the supply of hand
sanitizers available to Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic was appropriate.
-
Quality
- The audit found that the Department relied too heavily on attestations from manufacturers that
they met the Department’s quality standard. Additionally, it was noted that Health Canada lacks
information about what products are available on the market.
- In response, Health Canada will explore options to strengthen its oversight of the quality of
NHPs, and mechanisms to obtain information about which NHPs are on the market. Health
Canada will also explore options to introduce fees for regulatory services associated with NHPs,
as currently exist for drugs and medical devices.
Compliance and Enforcement
- The audit recommended that Health Canada develop proactive risk-based activities, including
inspections, as part of its compliance and enforcement approach.
- The audit also noted that when an issue was brought to the Department’s attention, compliance
could not always be achieved.
- In response, the Department intends to take steps to propose new tools to strengthen its ability
to deter and address non-compliance. This includes considering extending the use of the
Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law) powers to natural health products,
including the authority to order a recall. These authorities currently exist for all drugs and
medical devices, but not for NHPs. As a result, Health Canada must rely on the goodwill of
companies to conduct a product recall in cases of serious health issues.
- Health Canada recently launched a pilot inspection program of site licence holders in order to
promote and verify industry compliance.
Labelling and Advertising
- The audit recommended increased monitoring of labels and advertising (including online
advertising) to ensure that they contain accurate product information.
- The audit also recommended improved labelling requirements to ensure consumers can easily
read and understandkey product information provided to protect their health, such as warning
statements and conditions for use.
- The Department has already started to pursue regulatory and policy changes to make labels
easier to read, understand and compare with other similar products. This proposal is expected
to be brought forward for pre-publication in Canada Gazette Part 1 this spring.
- The Department will also be taking steps to implement a comprehensive proactive monitoring
strategy to ensure that labels and advertisingare consistent with the terms of the product
licence.
-
Q3. Why do these gaps exist in the oversight of natural health products? Why is Health
Canada not already taking more action to improve its regulatory approach?
Health Canada is committed to the continuous improvement of its natural health products program to
help ensure that products sold in Canada are safe and effective and is taking steps to address the
recommendations in the audit report.
The Natural Health Products Program has evolved substantiallysince the Natural Health
Products Regulations came into force in in 2004. To date, over 100,000 products have been licensed and
there are currently approximately 750 active site licenses. All current oversight activities are performed
within existing budgets, without additional funding through fees.
Natural health products are currently the only line of health products in Canadafor which all regulatory
activities are funded solely by the Department’s operating budget. Health Canada is exploring options
forintroducing industry fees that would help offset the costs of licencing products and the sites that
manufacture them, and provide the means to scale-up post-market monitoring, compliance and
enforcement activities.
Health Canada has already made efforts to take more proactive steps to monitoring natural health
products. For example, earlier this year, the Department launched a pilot inspection program to
proactively assess the compliance of companies with good manufacturing practices requirements. The
objective of the pilot program is to strengthen compliance of the natural health products industry.
Increased compliance with regulatory requirements protects the health and safety of Canadians by
ensuring these products are safe, effective and of high quality.
Q4. How long will it take Health Canada to implement the recommended changes?
In many of the areas of recommendation, work to address gaps has already begun. For
example:
- An inspection pilot program was recently launched to promote and verify complianceof licence
holders across Canada.
- The Department is also expanding its oversight of online advertising of natural health products
through a pilot program to ensure advertisements are providing Canadians with accurate and
reliable information to inform their choices.
- The Department is on track to publish a regulatory proposal to improve the labelling of natural
health products for consultation later this spring.
Other elements of the Department’s response will take more time to implement, such as the
Department’s plans to take steps to propose user fees for NHPs. In order to implement this, the
Department will develop a proposal which will be subject to comprehensive stakeholder consultation
prior to implementation.
Q5. How do you expect industry and stakeholders to react to the audit recommendations and the
Department’s response?
Key stakeholders are aware of this audit and areas of focus.
Following the publication of the audit report, the Department will engage with key partners and
stakeholders on steps toaddress the findings/recommendations of the audit
Overview of the Natural Health Products Program and Update on the Commissioner of the Environment
and Sustainable Development’s Audit
Departmental Audit Committee
May28, 2021
Purpose
Provide an overview of:
• Health Canada’s Natural Health Products (NHP) Program; and
• Recent audit by the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable
Development (CESD), recommendations and departmental response
• Next steps
Consumers Use Natural Health Products Daily
• NHPs include a broad range of products such as vitamin and mineral supplements, probiotics,
toothpaste, sunscreen, herbal preparations, homeopathic remedies, and traditional products (e.g.,
traditional Chinese medicines, Ayurvedic medicines).
• More than 73% of Canadians buy NHPs regularly (Ipsos-Reid survey, 2010)
• Consumers purchase and use NHPs with no intervention by a healthcare practitioner
• Sold side-by-side with over-the-counter drugs, with little distinctionbetween product types,
despite differences in regulatory oversight and evidence
Natural Health Products Come With Risk
Incorrect dosage: Consumer selected incorrect product and accidentally gave her newborn a very high
dose of Vitamin D (14,400 units vs400 units)
Unintended product selection: Chemotherapy patient with nausea advised to take Gravol, reported
worsening of condition as she took an NHP which does not contain dimenhydrinate
Undisclosed allergens: NHPs containing undisclosed milk ingredientscan cause mild to severe allergic
reactions such as breathing difficulties, and could be life threatening
Incorrect use:
Data from Canadian Poison Centres showed hand sanitizer incidents were up to 4.5 fold higher from
March to September 2020 compared to 2019
Overview of the Natural Health Products Program
- Minister of Health
- Deputy Minister
- Health Product and Food Branch (HPFB)
o Natural and Non-prescription Health Products Directorate
 Clinical trials
 Product licensing
 Site licensing
 Post-market risk management
o Marketed Health Products Directorate
 Adverse reaction reporting
 Advertising monitoring
 Safety reviews
 Drug incident analysis
 Risk communications
- Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch (ROEB)
o Health Product Compliance Directorate
 Proactive and reactive compliance and enforcement
 Risk management
Program Improvements Began in 2017
- 2016/17
o Paper applications
o Extensive efforts to assist the applicant get a license
o Refusal rate of 2-3%
o Service standards of 10 and 30 days for monograph applications isinsufficient
o Reliance on sponsor attestation to issue a license
o Up to 50% of applications fail to meet all safety and efficacy requirements
o Reactive compliance and enforcement
- 2019/20–ongoing
o Electronic applications only
o Online web application
o Health Canada is stricter on review
o Higher refusal rate-currently at 30%
o Service standards of 60 and 90 days for monograph applications provides sufficient time
for full review
o Full review
o All licensed products meet all safety and efficacy requirements
o Mix of proactive and reactive compliance and enforcement
Further program improvements planned: self-care framework
- Oversight proportional to risk
o Similar evidence for similar claims
o Informed consumer choice
o Risk-based post-market oversight
- Cost recovery for allproducts modern business systems
Regulatory proposal to address labelling challenges
- Current: unreadable labels with no standard layout
- Proposed: 6 point front size minimum, high contrast (black on white), requiring a Product Facts
Table
Overview of theCESD Audit
Objective:
– Determine “whether Health Canada ensured that NHPs available for sale in Canada are
safe and accurately represented to consumers”
Scope and Period:
– Health Canada’s pre-market licensing activities and post-market compliance and
monitoring activities for NHPs from January 2017 to December 2019
– Expanded to include Health Canada’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic specific to the NHP
Program from April and May 2020
Key Findings:
– Health Canada licensed NHPs appropriately, based on evidence of safety and efficacy
– When an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention, immediate action was taken
– Gaps identified in oversight of quality, monitoring of labels and advertising, and compliance and
enforcement of marketed NHPs
– Product label information was not easy to read
– Health Canada acted appropriately to successfully increase the supply of alcohol-based
hand sanitizers
Recommendations and Departmental Response
Health Canada accepts CESD’s five recommendations and has developed anaction plan
- Quality:
o Audit recommendations:
 Increased oversight of the quality of NHPs, to reduce reliance on company
attestations
o Department’s response
 Develop fully costed options for risk-based
 approach to quality oversight
 Explore mechanisms to obtain information about which products are available
on the market
 Pursue the expansion of fees to NHPs
- Labelling and advertising
o Audit recommendations
 Greater monitoring of labels and advertising (including online advertising)
 Improved labelling to ensure product labels can be read by consumers
o Department’s response
 Develop a multi-year implementation plan to expand proactive monitoring of
advertising to NHPs
 Continue to advance regulatory proposal to improve the labelling of NHPs
- Monitoring and compliance
o Audit recommendations
 Risk-based inspection program
 Risk-based monitoring program to address unlicensed products and
unauthorized labelling and advertising
 Improved enforcement to achieve full compliance in cases of serious health risks
o Department’s response
 Continue implementation of pilot NHP Good Manufacturing Practices inspection
program (launched in March 2021)
 Develop and launch risk-based approach for monitoring NHP advertising
incidents via a tool which will classify advertising incidents based on level of risk
 Take steps to strengthen ability to deter and address non-compliance by
pursuing the expansion of Vanessa’s Law powers to NHPs
 Pursue the expansion of fees to NHPs
 Pursue the expansion of Vanessa’s Law powers to NHPs
Next Steps
• Management Response and Action Plan (MRAP) has been finalized
• Work to address many of the areas identified in the report are already underway, including:
– Establishing options to strengthen oversight of quality and advertising
– Continuing to implement the pilot inspection program to promote and verify compliance with
good manufacturing practices
– Proposing regulatory and policy changes to improve labelling of NHPs
– Taking steps to pursue cost recovery for NHPs
– Taking steps to propose new tools to address non-compliance, including moving forward with a
proposal to expand Vanessa's Law powers to these products
• Updates on the Department’s progress on implementing the MRAP will be provided to DAC on a
periodic basis, starting October 2021
This audit is an importantmilestone for the NHP Program
REDACTED–CONFIDENCE OF THE QUEEN’S PRIVY COUNCIL
Master overview of the committee
Standing committee on public accounts (PACP)
Mandate of the Committee
When theSpeaker tables a report by the Auditor General in the House of Commons, it is automatically
referred to the Public Accounts Committee. The Committee selects the chapters of the report it wants to
study and calls the Auditor General and senior public servants from the audited organizations to appear
before it to respond to the Office of the Auditor General’s findings. The Committee also reviews the
federal government’s consolidated financial statements–the Public Accounts of Canada–and examines
financialand/or accounting shortcomings raised by the Auditor General. At the conclusion of a study,
the Committee may present a report to the House of Commons that includes recommendations to the
government for improvements in administrative and financial practices and controls of federal
departments and agencies.
Government policy, and the extent to which policy objectives are achieved, are generally not examined
by the Public Accounts Committee. Instead, the Committee focuses on government administration–the
economy and efficiency of program delivery as well as the adherence to government policies, directives
and standards. The Committee seeks to hold the government to account for effective public
administration and due regard for public funds.
Pursuant to Standing Order 108(3) of the House of Commons, the mandate of the Standing Committee
on Public Accounts is to review and report on:
• The Public Accounts of Canada;
• All reports of the Auditor General of Canada;
• The Office of the Auditor General’s Departmental Plan and Departmental Results Report; and,
• Any other matter that the House of Commons shall, from time to time, refer to the Committee
The Committee also reviews:
• The federal government’s consolidated financial statements;
• The Public Accounts ofCanada;
• Makes recommendations to the government for improvements in spending practices;
• Considers the Estimates of the Office of the Auditor General.
Other Responsibilities:
• The economy, efficiency and effectiveness of government administration;
• The quality of administrative practices in the delivery of federal programs; and,
• Government’s accountability to Parliament with regard to federal spending.
Committee Members
CHAIR:
- John Williamson, Conservative, New Brunswick Southwest, PACP member since February 2022
VICE-CHAIRL
- Jean Yip, Liberal, Scarborough—Agincourt, PACP member since January 2018
- Nathalie Sinclair-Desgagné Critic for Public Accounts; Pandemic Programs; Economic
Development Agencies, Bloc Québécois, Terrebonne, PACP member since December 2021
MEMBERS
- Eric Duncan, Conservative, Stormont—Dundas—South Glengarry, PACP member since February
2022
- Jeremy Patzer, Conservative, Cypress Hill—Grasslands, PACP member sinceFebruary 2022
- Phillip Lawrence Critic for Federal Economic Development Agency for Eastern, Central and
Southern Ontario, Conservative, Northumberland—Peterborough South, PACP member since
October 2020
- Blake Desjarlais, Critic for TBS; Diversity and Inclusion; Youth; Sport and PSE, New Democratic
Party, Edmonton Greisbach, PACP member since December 2021
- Valerie Bradford, Liberal, Kitchener South–Hespeler, PACP member since December 2021
- Han Dong, Liberal, Don Valley North, PACP member since December 2021
- Peter Fragiskatos, Parliamentary Secretary National Revenue, Liberal, London North Centre,
PACP member since December 2021
- Brenda Shanahan, Liberal, Châteauguay—Lacolle, PACP member since December 2021; and Jan
2016–Jan 2018
Bios ofthe Committee Members
- John Williamson (New Brunswick Southwest)
o Conservative
o Chair
o Elected as MP for New Brunswick Southwest in 2011, he was then defeated in 2015 and
re-elected in 2019 & 2021.
o Currently also serves as a Member of the Liaison Committee
o Previously served on many committees, including PACP for a brief time in 2013
o Prior to his election, M. Williamson occupied different positions. He was an editorial
writer for the National Post from 1998 to 2001, then joined the Canadian Taxpayers
Federationuntil 2008. In 2009, he was hired by Stephen Harper as director of
communications in the PMO.
- Jean Yip (Scarborough-Agincourt)
o Liberal
o First Vice-Chair
o Elected as MP for Scarborough—Agincourt in a by-election on December 11, 2017, and
re-elected in 2019 & 2021.
o Has served on Public Accounts (since 2018), as well as Government Operations and
Canada-China committees in the past.
o Before her election, Ms. Yip was an insurance underwriter and constituency assistant.
- Nathalie Sinclair-Desgagné (Terrebonne)
o Bloc Québécois
o Second vice-chair
o Elected as MP for Terrebonne in the 2021 federal election.
o BQ Critic for Public Accounts; Pandemic Programs; and Federal Economic Development
Agencies.
o Worked at the European Investment Bank and at PWC London.
o Return toQuebec in 2017 to pursue a career in the Quebec business world.
- Eric Duncan (Stormont-Dundas-South Glengarry)
o Conservative
o Member
o Elected as MP for Stormont-Dundas-South Glengarry in 2019, and re-elected in 2021.
o Vice-Chair of Procedure and House AffairsCommittee
o Has served on COVID-19 Pandemic, Procedure and House Affairs and Library of
Parliament committees in the past.
o Prior to his election, Mr. Duncan was one of the youngest elected officials in Canadian
History as a municipal Counsellor in North Dundas at the age of 18, and was elected
mayor at the age of 22 (from 2010 to 2018).
- Jeremy Patzer (Cypress Hills-Grasslands)
o Conservative
o Member
o Elected as MP for Cypress Hills-Grasslands in 2019, and re-elected in 2021.
o Member of the Standing Committee on International Trade.
o Has served on Natural Resources, Industry, Science and Technology and COVID-19
Pandemic committees in the past.
o Prior to his election, Mr. Patzer worked in the telecommunications industry for ten
years.
- Phillip Lawrence (Northumberland—Peterborough South)
o Conservative
o Member
o Elected as MP for Northumberland—Peterborough South in 2019, and re-elected in
2021.
o CPC Critic for the Federal Economic Development Agency for Eastern, Central and
Southern Ontario.
o Has served on Public Accounts (since 2020), as well as the Justice committees in the
past.
o Prior to his election, Mr. Lawrence received his BA from Brock University in Political
Science, he attended Osgoode Hall Law School and the Schulich School of business to
obtain his law degree andMBA, and volunteered at the Financial Planning Standards
Council.
- Blake Desjarlais (Edmonton Greisbach)
o NDP
o Member
o Elected as MP for Edmonton Greisbach in 2021.
o NDP Critic for Treasury Board; Diversity and Inclusion; Youth; Sport; and Post-secondary
Education.
o First openly Two-Spirit person and Alberta’s only Indigenous Member of Parliament.
- Valerie Bradford (Kitchener South–Hespeler)
o Liberal
o Member
o Elected as MP for Kitchener South–Hespeler in 2021.
o Also sits on the Science and Research committee.
o Prior to her election, Ms. Bradford worked as an economic development professional for
the City of Kitchener.
- Han Dong (Don Valley North)
o Liberal
o Member
o Elected as MP for Don Valley North in 2019, and re-elected in 2021.
o Also sits on the Industry and Technology committee.
o Has served on the Ethics, and Human Resources committees in the past.
o Prior to his election, Mr. Dong worked with Toronto-based high-tech company
dedicated to building safer communities and served as the leader of the Chinatown
GatewayCommittee established by Mayor John Tory.
- Peter Fragiskatos (London North Centre)
o Liberal
o Member
o Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of National Revenue
o Elected as MP for London North Centre in 2015, and re-elected in 2019 & 2021.
o Serves as Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of National Revenue.
o Has served on the Finance, Canada-China, Human Resources, Public Safety, and Foreign
Affairs committees in the past.
o Served as a member of the National Security and Intelligence Committee of
Parliamentarians (NSICOP).
o Prior to his election, Mr. Fragiskatos was a political science professor at Huron
University College and King’s University College, as well as a frequent media
commentator on international issues.
- Brenda Shanahan (Châteauguay—Lacolle)
o Liberal
o Member
o Elected as MP for Châteauguay—Lacolle in 2015, and re-elected in 2019 & 2021.
o Has served on Public Accounts (2016-2018), as well as Ethics, Government Operations,
and MAID committees in the past.
o Has served as a member of the NationalSecurity and Intelligence Committee of
Parliamentarians (NSICOP).
o Prior to her election, Ms. Shanahan was a banker and social worker, who has also been
involved in a number of organizations such as Amnesty International and the Canadian
Federation of University Women.
