Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:36.655819
Name: About_the_Canadian_product_safety_pledge_for_consumer_products_and_cosmetics
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/about-canadian-product-safety-pledge.html
Package ID: dc1e9f18-73cf-40f9-a308-75df60fd7909
Keywords: ['consumer-products-and-cosmetics', 'product safety', 'product safety pledge', 'products sold online', 'online marketplaces', 'safety of consumer-products-and-cosmetics']
Notes: Learn about the Canadian product safety pledge. Online marketplaces are signing the pledge to strengthen the safety of consumer products and cosmetics sold online.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
About the Canadian product safety pledge for consumer products and cosmetics - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics About the Canadian product safety pledge for consumer products and cosmetics Learn about the Canadian product safety pledge. Online marketplaces are signing the pledge to strengthen the safety of consumer products and cosmetics sold online. On this page What is the pledge Signatories to the pledge Join the pledge What is the pledge Health Canada launched the pledge on September 28, 2023. The pledge is part of our ongoing commitment to protect the health and safety of people in Canada. Canadian product safety pledge for consumer products and cosmetics By signing the pledge, online marketplaces are making a commitment to take 14 preventative and corrective actions. These actions will help strengthen the safety of consumer products and cosmetics purchased through their online marketplaces. The actions include: detecting and preventing the sale of unsafe products co-operating with Health Canada raising product safety awareness among sellers empowering consumers on product safety issues To track progress and measure the pledge's impact on the safety of consumer products and cosmetics available online, Health Canada will monitor the preventative and corrective actions that signatories take. We will also publish an annual report. Signatories to the pledge Companies that have already signed the pledge are: Amazon Canada eBay Canada Temu Canada Join the pledge Online marketplaces can strengthen their commitment to product safety in Canada by becoming a signatory to the pledge. Contact Health Canada for more information or to express your interest in signing the pledge. Email us at ps.pledge-engagement.sp@hc-sc.gc.ca. Related links Recalls and safety alerts Online shopping: Product safety Industry and health professionals Selling consumer products and cosmetics online Page details Date modified: 2024-12-19 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy