Created: 2023-02-24T21:03:09.142728
Name: Health_Canada_–_Standing_Senate_Committee_on_National_Finance-_Minister_of_health_Briefing_Binder_–_Bill_C-31
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/dddaf01c-b47f-4fb8-a82e-8ef51f1bdc99/resource/6cc3aa12-a84a-4926-a7ba-46bfec6df81a/download/disclosure-s-committee-en-full-text.pdf
Package ID: dddaf01c-b47f-4fb8-a82e-8ef51f1bdc99
Keywords: ['Health Canada', 'Health', 'Government legislation', 'Senate committee', 'Senate committee on national finances', 'Bill C-31', 'dental care']
Notes: Briefing material for the minister of Health for the apparition at the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance in November 2022 concerning Bill C-31, Dental Care
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Bill C-31-An Act respecting cost of living relief measures related todental care and rental housing
Committee Appearance Briefing Binder
Standing Senate Committee on National Finance
November 2, 2022
Bill C-31-An Act respecting cost of living relief measures related todental care and rental housing
Committee Appearance Briefing Binder
Standing Senate Committee on National Finance
November 2, 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Text of the Bill
2. QP Notes
a. Challenges in access for those who do not file taxes
b. P/T Jurisdiction
c. Duplication of coverage provided through P/T programs
d. Fiscal Implications
e. Health Human Resources Impacts
f. Indigenous people, governments and organizations Impacts
g. Urgent need for Royal Assent (by October 31, 2022)
h. Impact of the Benefit on children under 12
i. Measures to prevent fraudulent applications
j. Marketing and Advertising of the Benefit
k. Work Towards a Long Term Program
3. News Release
4. Legislative Backgrounder
5. Media Lines/Questions and Answers
7. Scenario Note
First Session, Forty-fourth Parliament,
70-71 Elizabeth II–1 Charles III, 2021-2022
HOUSE OF COMMONS OF CANADA
Bill C-31
An Act respecting cost of living relief measures related to dental care and rental housing
AS PASSED
BY THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
OCTOBER 27, 2022
RECOMMENDATION
Her Excellency the Governor General recommends to the House of Commons the appropriation of
public revenue under the circumstances, in the manner and for the purposes setout in a measure
entitled “An Act respecting cost of living relief measures related to dental care and rental housing”.
RECOMMENDATION
Her Excellency the Governor General recommends to the House of Commons the appropriation of
public revenue under the circumstances, in the manner and for the following amendments to
Bill C-31, “An Act respecting cost of living relief measures related to dental care and rental housing”.
That Bill C-31, in Clause 3, be amended by
(a) replacing line 17 on page 18 with the following: vices, only 90% of the payment is to be taken into
account
(b) replacing lines 23 to 29 on page 18 with the following: purposes of paragraph (1)(g) is the total
amount of rent paid in 2022 by the applicant.
SUMMARY
Part 1 enacts the Dental BenefitAct, which provides for the establishment of an application-based
interim dental benefit. The benefit provides interim direct financial support for parents for dental care
services received by their children under 12 years of age in the period starting inOctober 2022 and
ending in June 2024.
Part 2 enacts the Rental Housing Benefit Act, which provides for the establishment of a one-time rental
housing benefit for eligible persons who have paid rent in 2022 for their principal residence and who
apply for the benefit.
Finally, Part 3 makes related amendments to the Income Tax Act, the Excise Tax Act and the Excise Act,
2001.
TABLE OF PROVISIONS
An Act respecting cost of living relief measures related to dental care and rental housing
ShortTitle
1 Cost of Living Relief Act, No. 2 (Targeted Support forHouseholds)
PART 1 Dental Benefit Act
2 Enactment of Act
An Act respecting benefits in relation to dental care
Short Title
1 Dental Benefit Act Interpretation
2 Definitions Dental Benefit
3 Payment of benefit
4 Eligibility
5 Application—first period
6 Application—second period
7 Application—additional dental benefit
8 Application—form, manner and contents
9 Amount of benefit
10 Attestation
General
11 Minister of NationalRevenue
12 Agreements or arrangements
13 Delegation
14 Payment out of Consolidated Revenue Fund
15 Social Insurance Number 16 Provision of information and documents
17 Benefit cannot be charged, etc.
18 Reconsideration of application
19 Request for review
20 Return of overpayment or erroneous payment
21 Limitation or prescription period
22 No interest payable
23 Violations
24 Limitation of imposition of penalties
25 Rescission or reduction of penalty
26 Recovery as debt due to His Majesty
27 Offences
28 Designation—investigators
29 Limitation period
30 Sunset provision
PART 2
Rental Housing Benefit Act
3 Enactment of Act
An Act respecting benefits in relation to rental housing Short Title
1 Rental Housing Benefit Act
Interpretation
2 Definitions
Rental Housing Benefit
3 Payment of benefit
4 Eligibility
5 Application
6 Attestation
General
7 Corporation
8 Minister of National Revenue
9 Agreements or arrangements
10 Delegation
11 Availability of information
12 Payment out ofConsolidated Revenue Fund
13 Social Insurance Number
14 Provision of information and documents
15 Benefit cannot be charged, etc.
16 Reconsideration of application
17 Request for review
18 Return of overpayment or erroneous payment
19 Limitation or prescription period
20 No interest payable
21 Violations
22 Limitation of imposition of penalties 23 Rescission or reduction of penalty
24 Recovery as debt due to His Majesty
25 Offences
26 Designation—investigators
27 Limitation period
28 Sunset provision
PART 3
Related Amendments
4 Income Tax Act
6 Excise Tax Act
7 Excise Act, 2001
1st Session, 44th Parliament,
70-71 Elizabeth II–1 Charles III, 2021-2022
HOUSE OF COMMONS OF CANADA
BILL C-31
An Act respecting cost of livingrelief measures related to dental care and rental housing
His Majesty, by andwith the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada,
enacts as follows:
Short Title
Short title
1 This Act may be cited asthe Cost of Living Relief Act,No. 2 (Targeted Support for Households).
PART 1
Dental Benefit Act
Enactment of Act
2 The Dental Benefit Act is enacted as follows:
An Act respecting benefits in relation to dental care
Preamble
Whereas the cost ofdental care services is of particular concern for Canadians, as many have no access
to a dental services plan and do not use those services because of the cost;
Whereas a lack of access to dental care services notonly causes harm to children but also hasan impact
on the health care system, with dental surgeries being regularly performed in pediatric hospitals; And
whereas the Government of Canada recognizes the need to provide interim dental benefits for children
under 12 years old while working towardsthe development of a long term national dental care program;
Now, therefore, His Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons
ofCanada, enacts as follows:
Short Title
Short title
1 This Act may be cited as the Dental Benefit Act.
Interpretation
Definitions
2 (1) The following definitions apply in this Act.
Agency has the samemeaning as in section 2 of theCanada Revenue Agency Act. (Agence)
base taxation year has the same meaning as in section 122.6 of the Income Tax Act. (année de base)
benefit period means, as the case may be,
(a) the period beginning on October 1, 2022 and ending on June 30, 2023; or
(b) the period beginning on July 1, 2023 and ending on June 30, 2024. (période de
prestation)
Canada child benefit means a deemed overpayment under Subdivision A.1 of Division E of Part I of the
Income Tax Act. (allocation canadienne pour enfants)
cohabiting spouse or common-law partner has the same meaning as in section 122.6 of the Income Tax
Act.(époux ou conjoint de fait visé)
Commissioner has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Canada Revenue Agency Act. (commissaire)
dental care services means the services that a dentist, denturist or dental hygienist is lawfully entitled to
provide, including oral surgery and diagnostic, preventative,restorative, endodontic, periodontal,
prosthodontic and orthodontic services. (services de soins dentaires)
dental services plan means a contract of insurance in respect of dental care services or a dental care
insurance plan obtained on the basis of employment or purchasedprivately. (régime d’assurance
dentaire)
eligible parent has the meaning assigned by the definition eligible individual in section 122.6 of the
Income Tax Act. (parent admissible)
His Majesty means His Majesty in right of Canada. (SaMajesté)
Minister means the Minister of Health. (ministre) qualified dependant has the same meaning as in
section 122.6 of the Income Tax Act. (personne à charge admissible)
shared-custody parent has thesame meaning as in section 122.6 of the Income Tax Act. (parent ayant la
garde partagée)
Definition of adjusted income
(2) For the purposes of this Act, adjusted income has the same meaning as in section 122.6 of the
Income TaxAct, except that the reference to “at the end of the year” is to be read as a reference to “on
December 1, 2022 in the case of an application made under section 5 or paragraph 7(a) and on July 1,
2023 in the case of an application made under section 6 or paragraph 7(b)”.
Dental Benefit
Payment of benefit
3 The Minister must pay a dental benefit to a person who is eligible for the benefit and who makes an
application.
Eligibility
4 (1) Subject to subsection (4), a person is eligible for a dental benefit if they meet the following
conditions:
(a) they are entitled to apply for the dental benefit under section 5, 6 or 7;
(b) they make an application in accordance with section 8 and provide the Minister with
any information that the Minister may require in respect of the application;
(c) their adjusted income is less than $90,000 for the base taxation year in relation to
(i) in the case of an application made under section5 or paragraph 7(a), December 1,
2022, and
(ii) in the case of an application made under section 6 or paragraph 7(b), July 1, 2023;
(d) they make the application in respect of a person who has received or will receive dental
care services the costs of which have not been and will not be fully 15 paid or reimbursed under
a program or plan established by the government of Canada or of a province; and
(e) they make the application in respect of a person who is not insured under a dental
services plan andwho does not have access to a dental care insurance plan obtained on the
basisof the employment of the applicant, their cohabiting spouse or common law partner or
any other person
(i) in the case of a person who has received dentalcare services on or before the
date of the application, on the date the person received theservices, and
(ii) in the case of a person who will receive dental care services after the date of the
application, on 30 the date of the application.
Part-year residents
(2) For the purposes of determining the applicant’s adjusted income in paragraph (1)(c), if a person was
a nonresident in Canada for the purposes of the Income Tax Act at any time in a taxationyear, the
person’s income forthe year is deemed to be the amount that would have been the person’s income for
the year had the person been resident in Canada throughout the year.
Bankruptcy
(3) For the purposes of determining the applicant’s adjusted income in paragraph (1)(c), if in a taxation
year aperson becomes bankrupt, their income for the taxation year is to include their income for the
taxation year that begins on January 1 of the calendar year that includes the date of bankruptcy.
Ineligibility
(4) The Minister may decide that an applicant is ineligible for a dental benefit if
(a) the Minister determines that their eligibility for a dental benefit for which they
previously applied under section 5 was based on a misrepresentation or the concealment of a
material fact on the part of the applicant; or
(b) the Minister has decided that an applicant has committed a violation in relation to an
application for a dental benefit previously made under section 5 andno decision to rescind that
decision has been made.
Application—first period
5 An eligible parent may, during the period beginning on December 1, 2022 and ending on June 30,
2023, apply to the Minister for a dental benefit in respect of each of their qualified dependants
(a) who has received or will receive dental care services in Canada during the period
beginning on October 1, 2022 and ending on June 30, 2023;
(b) who is under 12 years ofage on December 1, 2022; and
(c) in respect of whom the parent is in receipt of a Canada child benefit on that date.
Application—second period
6 An eligible parent may,during the period beginning onJuly 1, 2023 and ending on June 30,2024, apply
to the Minister for a dental benefit in respect of each of theirqualified dependants
(a) who has received or will receive dental care services in Canada during that period;
(b) who is under 12 years of age on July 1, 2023;
(c) in respect of whom the parent is in receipt of a Canada child benefit on that date; and
(d) in respect of whom no person who is entitled to apply for an additional dental benefit
under paragraph 7(a) and who is eligible for that benefit has made anapplication under that
paragraph.
Application—additional dental benefit
7 A person may, during the period beginning on July 1, 2023 and ending on June 30, 2024, apply to the
Minister for an additional dental benefit if
(a) they make the application in respect of a person
(i) in respect of whom they made an application for a dental benefit under section
5 and were eligible for that benefit,
(ii) in respect of whom no eligible parent who is entitled to apply for a dental
benefit under section 6 and who is eligible for that benefit has made an application
under that section, and
(iii) who received dental care services during the period beginning on October 1,
2022 and ending on June 30, 2023, the cost of which exceeded $650; or
(b) they are an eligibleparent, their adjusted income was less than $90,000 for the base
taxation year in relation to December 1, 2022 and they make the application in respect of their
qualified dependant
(i) in respect of whom a dental benefit was not received for the period beginning on
December 1,2022and ending on June 30, 2023,
(ii) in respect of whom they made an application for a dental benefit under section
6 and are eligible for that benefit,
(iii) who has receivedor will receive dental careservices during the period
beginning on July 1, 2023 and ending on June 30, 2024, the cost of which has exceeded
or will exceed $650, and
(iv) who is not insured under a dental services plan and who does not have access
to a dental care insurance plan obtained on the basis of the employment of the
applicant,their cohabiting spouse or common law partner or any other person
(A) in the case of a dependant who has received dental care services on or
before the date of the 35 application, on the date the dependant received the
services, and
(B) in the case of a dependant who will receive dental care services after
the date of the application, on the date of the application.
Application—form, manner and contents
8 An application for a dental benefit must be made in the form and manner established by the Minister
and must contain the following:
(a) the applicant’s name and address;
(b) the attestation referred to in section 10;
(c) the name, address and telephone number of the dentist, denturist or dental hygienist
who provided, or who the applicant intends to have provide, dental care services for the person
in respect of whom the application is made, as wellas the month during which theservices were
provided or during which the applicant intends to have the services provided;
(d) the name, address and telephone number of the employer, if any, of the applicant and
of their cohabitingspouse or common-law partner
(i) in the case of a person who has received dental care services on or before the
date of the application, on the date that person received the services, and
(ii) in the case of a person who will receive dentalcare services after the date of the
application, on the date of the application; and
(e) any other information that the Minister may require.
Amount of benefit
9 (1) Subject to subsection(2), the amount of a dentalbenefit is
(a) $650, if an applicant’s adjusted income is less than $70,000 for the base taxation year in
relation to
(i) in the case of an application made under section5 or paragraph 7(a), December 1,
2022, and
(ii) in the case of an application made under section 6 or paragraph 7(b), July 1, 2023;
(b) $390, if an applicant’s adjusted income is equal to or greater than $70,000 but less than
$80,000 for thebasetaxation year in relation to
(ii) in the case of an application made under section 6 or paragraph 7(b), July 1,
2023; and
c) $260, if an applicant’s adjusted income is equal toor greater than $80,000 but less than
$90,000 for the base taxation year in relation to
(i) in the case of an application made under section 5 or paragraph 7(a), December
1, 2022, and (ii) in the case of an application made under section 6 or paragraph 7(b),
July 1, 2023.
Amount—shared-custody parent
(2) If, at the beginning of the relevant period, an applicant is a shared-custody parent of the person in
respect of whom the application is made, the amount of a dental benefit is 50% of the amount referred
to in paragraph(1)(a), (b) or (c), as the case may be.
Relevant period
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), the relevant period is
(a) in the case of an application made under section 5 or paragraph 7(a), the period
beginning on October 1,2022 and ending on June 30, 2023; and
(b) in the case of an application made under section 6 or paragraph 7(b), the period
beginning on July 1, 2023 and ending on June 30, 2024.
December 1, 2022
(4) For the purposes of subsection (2) and paragraph(3)(a), the period beginning on October 1, 2022
and ending on June 30, 2023 is deemed to begin on December 1, 2022.
Limit
(5) No more than two dental benefits—or, in the case of shared-custody parents, no more than four
dental benefits in the amount referredto in subsection (2)—may be paid in respect of a person who
has received or will receive dental services.
Attestation
10 (1) The applicant must, in their application, attest that
(a) the person in respect of whom the application is made has received dental care services
in Canada during the relevant period or the applicant intends for the person to receive dental
care servicesin Canada during the relevant period; and
(b) the person in respect of whom the application is made is not insured under a dental
services plan and does not have access to a dental care insurance plan obtained on the basis of
the employment of the applicant, their cohabiting spouse or common law partner or any other
person
(i) in the case of a person who has received dental careservices on or before the
date of the application, on the date that person received the services, and
(ii) in the case of a person who the applicant intends to receive dental care services
after the date of the application, on the date of the application.
Relevant period
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the relevant period is
(a) in the case of an application made under section 5 or paragraph 7(a), the period
beginning on October 1, 2022 and ending on June 30, 2023; and
(b) in the case of an application made under section 6 or paragraph 7(b), the period
beginning on July 1,2023 and ending on June 30, 2024.
General
Minister of National Revenue
11 The Minister of National Revenue may provide services and carry out activities to support the
Minister in the administration and enforcement of this Act and may authorize the Commissioner or any
other person who is employed or engaged by the Agency or who occupies a position of responsibility in
the Agency to provide those services or carry out those activities.
Agreements or arrangements
12 The Minister may enter into agreements or arrangements with any department,board or agency of
the Government of Canada to assist the Minister in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act.
Delegation
13 The Minister may authorize the Commissioner or any other person or body, or member of a class of
persons or bodies, to exercise any power or perform any duty or function of the Minister under this Act.
Payment out of Consolidated Revenue Fund
14 Allamounts payable by the Minister under section 3are to be paid out of the Consolidated Revenue
Fund.
Social Insurance Number
15 The Minister is authorized to collect and use, for the purposes of the administration and enforcement
of this Act, the Social Insurance Number of a person who makesan application under this Act.
Provision of information and documents
16 (1) The Minister may, for any purpose related to verifying compliance or preventing non-compliance
with this Act, require that any person provide any information or document, including a receipt for
payment in respect of dental care services, within the reasonable time thatthe Minister may specify.
Ineligibility
(2) The Minister may decide that an applicant who fails to fulfill or comply with a requirement under
subsection (1) is ineligible for a dentalbenefit in respect of the benefit period to which the application
relates.
Benefit cannot be charged, etc.
17 A dental benefit
(a) is not subject to the operation of any law relating to bankruptcy or insolvency;
(b) cannot be assigned, charged, attached or given as security;
(c) cannot be retained by way of deduction, set-off or compensation under any Act of
Parliament other than this Act; and
(d) is not garnishable moneys for the purposes of the Family Orders and Agreements
Enforcement Assistance Act.
Reconsideration of application
18 (1) Subject to subsection (5), the Minister may reconsider an application within 24 months after the
day on which the benefit period to which the application relates ends.
Decision
(2) If the Minister decides on reconsideration that a person has received money by way of a dental
benefit to which they were not entitled, or has not received money to which they were entitled, the
Minister must calculate the amount of the money and notify the person of theMinister’s decision.
Amount repayable
(3) Section 20 applies if the Minister decides that a person has received money by way of a dental
benefit to which they were not entitled.
Amount payable
(4) If the Minister decides that a person was entitled toreceive money by way of a dental benefit, and
the money was not paid, the amount calculated under subsection (2) is payable to the person.
Extended time to reconsider claim
(5) If, in the opinion of the Minister, a false or misleading statement or representation has been made in
connection with an application for a dental benefit, the Minister has 72 months within which to
reconsider the application.
Request for review
19 (1) A person who is the subject of a decision of the Minister made under this Act may make a request
to theMinister, in the form and manner established by the Minister, for a review of that decision at any
time within 90 days after the day on which they are notified of the decision or any further time that the
Minister may allow.
Review
(2) The Minister must reviewthe decision if a request for itsreview is made under subsection (1). On
completion of the review, the Minister must confirm, vary or rescind the decision.
Notification
(3) The Minister must notify the person who made the request of the result of the Minister’s review
under sub-section(2).
Return of overpayment or erroneous payment
20 (1) If the Minister determines that a person has received a dental benefit to which they are not
entitled, or an amount in excess of the amount of such a benefit to which they are entitled, the person
must repay theamount of the payment or the excess amount, as the case may be, as soon as feasible.
Recovery as debt due to His Majesty
(2) The amount of the erroneous payment or overpayment, as determined by the Minister, constitutes a
debt due to His Majesty as of the day on which the amount was paid and the debt is payable and may be
recovered by the Minister as of the day the Minister determined theamount of the erroneous payment
or overpayment.
Limitation or prescription period
21 (1) Subject tothis section, no action or proceedings may be taken to recover money owing under this
Act after the end of the six-year limitation or prescription period that begins on the day on which the
money becomes due and payable.
Deduction, set-off or compensation
(2) Money owing by a person under this Act may be recovered at any time by way of deduction from, or
set-offor compensation against, any sum of money, including adental benefit, that may be due or
payable by His Majestyto the person, other than an amount payable under section 122.61 of the
Income Tax Act.
Acknowledgment of liability
(3) If a person’s liability for money owing under this Act is acknowledged in accordance with subsection
(5), the time during which the limitation or prescription period has run before the acknowledgment does
not count in the calculation of that period.
Acknowledgment after limitation or prescription period
(4) If a person’s liability for money owing under this Act is acknowledged in accordance with subsection
(5) after theend of the limitation or prescription period, an actionor proceedings to recover the money
may, subject to subsections (3) and (6), be brought withinsix years after the date of the
acknowledgment.
Typesof acknowledgments
(5) An acknowledgment of liability means
(a) a written promise to pay the money owing, signed 30 by the person or their agent or
other representative;
(b) a written acknowledgment of the money owing, signed by the person or their agent or
other representative, whether or not a promise to pay can be implied from it and whether or
notit contains a refusal to pay;
(c) a part payment by the person or their agent or other representative of any money
owing; or
(d) any acknowledgment of the money owing made by the person, their agent or other
representative or the trustee or administrator in the course of proceedings under the
Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act or anyother legislation dealing with the payment of debts.
Limitation or prescription period suspended
(6) The running of a limitation or prescription period in respect of money owing under this Act is
suspended during any period in which it is prohibited to commence or continue an action or other
proceedings against the person to recover money owing under this Act.
Non-application
(7) This section does not apply in respect of an action or proceedings relating to the execution, renewal
or enforcement of a judgment.
No interest payable
22 No interest is payable on any amount owing to His Majesty under this Act as aresult of an
overpayment oran erroneous payment.
Violations
23 (1) A person commits a violation if they
(a) knowingly make, in relation to an application for adental benefit, a representation that
is false or misleading; or
(b) make an application for, and receive, a dental benefit knowing that they are not eligible
to receive it.
Penalty
(2) The Minister may impose a penalty on a person if the Minister is of the opinion thatthe person has
committed a violation.
Amount of penalty
(3) The Minister may set the amount of the penalty for each violation at not more than 50% of the
dental benefit that was or would have been paid as a result of committing the violation.
Maximum
(4) The maximum amountof all penalties that may be imposed on a particular person under this section
is $5,000.
For greater certainty
(5) For greater certainty, no penalty may be imposed on a person if theymistakenly believe that a
representation is true or that they were eligible to receive the dental benefit, as the case may be.
Purpose of penalty
(6) The purpose of a penalty is to promote compliancewith this Act and not to punish.
Limitation of imposition of penalties
24 A penalty must not be imposed under section 23 if more than three years have passed after the day
on which the act that would constitute the violation occurred.
Rescission or reduction of penalty
25 The Minister may rescindthe imposition of a penaltyunder section 23, or reduce the penalty, on the
presentation of new facts or on being of the opinion that the penalty was imposed without knowledge
of, or on the basis of a mistake as to, some material fact.
Recovery as debt due to His Majesty
26 A penalty imposed under section 23 constitutes adebt due to His Majesty and the debt is payable
and may be recovered by the Minister as of the day on which the penalty is imposed.
Offences
27 (1) Every person commits an offence who
(a) for the purpose of obtaining a dental benefit for themselves, knowingly uses false
identity information or another person’s identity information;
(b) with intent to steal all or a substantial part of another person’s dental benefit, counsels
that person toapply for the benefit; or
(c) knowingly makes, in relation to one or more applications under this Act, three or more
representations that are false or misleading, if the total amount of the dental benefits that were
or would have been paid as a result of the applications is at least $5,000.
Punishment
(2) Every person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable on summary conviction to a
fine of not more than the sum of $5,000 plus an amount of not more than double the amount of the
dental benefitthat was or would have been paid as a result of committingthe offence, to imprisonment
for a term of not more than two years less a day, or to both.
Definition of identity information
(3) In paragraph (1)(a), identity information has the samemeaning as in section 402.1 of the Criminal
Code.
Designation—investigators
28 (1) The Minister may designate as an investigator any person or class of persons for the purpose of
enforcing section 27.
Authorization
(2) The Minister may authorize the Commissioner to designate as an investigator any employee or class
of employees of the Agency for the purpose of enforcing section 27.
Limitation period
29 Proceedings in respect of an offence under this Actmay be instituted at any time within, but not later
than, five years after the day on which the Minister becomes aware of the subject matter of the
prosecution.
Sunset provision
30 Despite any other provision of this Act, a payment out of the ConsolidatedRevenue Fund must not
be madeunder this Act after the fifth anniversary of the day on which this Act comes into force.
PART 2
Rental Housing Benefit Act
Enactment of Act
3 The Rental Housing Benefit Act is enacted as follows:
An Act respecting benefitsin relation to rental housing
His Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada,
enacts as follows:
Short Title
Short title
1 This Act may be citedas the Rental Housing BenefitAct.
Interpretation
Definitions
2 (1) The following definitions apply in this Act.
Agency means the Canada Revenue Agency. (Agence)
cohabiting spouse or common-law partnerhas the same meaning as in section 122.6 of the Income Tax
Act.(époux ou conjoint defait visé)
Commissioner has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Canada Revenue Agency Act. (commissaire)
Corporation means the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation. (Société)
His Majesty means His Majesty in right of Canada. (SaMajesté)
Minister means the member of the King’s Privy Council for Canada designated as Minister for the
purposes of the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation Act. (ministre)
reference day means the later of December 1, 2022 and the day on which this Act comes into force.
(date de référence)
rent means a payment made under a lease, licence or similar arrangement to occupy a principal
residence, including any part of the payment that is allocated to pay for utilities or property taxes. It
does not include any such payment, or part of any such payment,
(a) that is paid in respect of utilities or property taxes to a person or entity who is not a
party to the lease, licence or arrangement;
(b) that is to be deducted from income from business under the Income Tax Act;
(c) that is specified and that is allocated to pay for
board or other services;
(d) that is paid by a person to a related person, within the meaning of paragraph 251(2)(a)
and subsection 251(6) of the Income Tax Act, and that is not income of the related person for
the purposes of that Act; or
(e) that is paid with respect to a capital lease.(loyer)
Spouse or common-law partner living separate and apart
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person is not considered to be living separate and apart from their
spouse or common-law partner at any time unless they are living separate and apart at that time,
because of a breakdown of their marriage or common-law partnership, for a period of at least 90 days
that includes that time.
Definition of adjustedincome
(3) In section 4, adjusted income has the same meaning as in section 122.6 of the Income Tax Act,
except that the reference to “at the end of the year” is to be read as a reference to “on the reference
day”.
Rental Housing Benefit
Payment of benefit
3 The Minister must pay a one-time rental housing benefit of $500 to a person who is eligible to receive
it and who makes an application under section 5.
Eligibility
4 (1) An applicant is eligible to receive a rental housing benefit if
(a) they are at least 15 years of age on the reference day;
(b) they are alive on the day on which their application is made in accordance with section
5;
(c) they are resident in Canada in 2022 for the purposes of the Income Tax Act and their
principal residence is, onthe reference day, situated in Canada;
(d) they—and, if any, their cohabiting spouse or common-law partner—have filed a
return of income, as defined in section 122.6 of the Income Tax Act, for2021 no later than the
120th day after the reference day;
(e) they have an adjusted income for 2021 of no more than
(i) $35,000, if they
(A) have a cohabiting spouse or common-law partner on the reference day,
(B) reside on the reference day with a qualified dependant, as defined in
section 122.6 of the IncomeTax Act, or
(C) claimed a deduction for 2021 under subsection 118(1) of that Act, because
of paragraph (b) of the description of B in that subsection, and are entitled to
that deduction, or
(ii) $20,000, in any other case;
f) they—or, if any, their cohabiting spouse or common-law partner—paid, in 2022, rent
that is in respect of 2022 for the applicant’s principal residence situated in Canada; and
g) subject to any of subsections (2) to (6) that apply in the circumstances, the total
amount of the rent referred to in paragraph (f) is at least 30% of the applicant’s adjusted income
for 2021.
Unspecified amount—board or other services
(2) If a payment for room and either board or other services is made in respect of a principal residence
and it includes an unspecified amount for the board or other services, only 90% of the payment is to be
taken into account as rent for the purposes of paragraph (1)(g).
Separation from cohabiting spouse or common-law partner
(3) If an applicant had a cohabiting spouse or commonlaw partner during 2022 but is living separate and
apartfrom them on the reference day, the total amount of rent paid by the applicant to be taken into
account for the purposes of paragraph (1)(g) is the total amount of rent paid in 2022 by the applicant.
Different principal residences
(4) If the applicant and their cohabiting spouse or common-law partner live in two different principal
residences at any point in 2022, the applicant may take into account, for the purposes of paragraph
(1)(g), the total amount of the rent paid in 2022 by either of them for both of those principal residences
while they were eachother’s cohabiting spouse or common-law partner.
Part-year residents
(5) For the purposes of determining the applicant’s adjusted income in paragraphs (1)(e) and (g), if a
person was non-resident in Canada for the purposes of the IncomeTax Act at any time in 2021, the
person’s income forthe year is deemed to be the amount that would have been the person’s income for
the year had the person been resident in Canada throughout the year.
Bankruptcy
(6) For the purposes of determining theapplicant’s adjusted income in paragraphs (1)(e) and (g), if a
person becomes bankrupt in 2021, their income for that year is to include their income for the taxation
year that begins on January 1 of 2021.
Only one cohabiting spouse or common-law partner eligible
(7) If two applicants who are each other’s cohabiting spouse or common-law partner on the reference
day both apply under section 5 for a rental housing benefit and both would, but for this subsection, be
eligible for the benefit, only the applicant that the Minister designatesiseligible to receive the benefit.
Application
5 An application for the benefit must
(a) be in the form and manner established by the Minister; and
(b) be made no earlierthan the reference day and nolater than the 120th day after the
reference day.
Attestation
6 An applicant must, in their application, attest to the accuracy of the information that they provide in it,
including the rent paid during 2022 for the principal residence, the address of the principal residence
and thename and contact information of the person to whom the rent was paid.
General
Corporation
7 The Corporation, on behalf of His Majesty and in the place of the Minister,
(a) has all the rights and liabilities of His Majesty andthe Minister under this Act; and
(b) exercises all the powers and performs all the duties and functions of the Minister under
this Act.
Minister of National Revenue
8 The Minister of National Revenue may provide services and carry out activities to support the Minister
inthe administration and enforcement of this Act and may authorize the Commissioner or any other
person who is employed or engaged by the Agency or who occupies a position of responsibilityin the
Agency to provide thoseservicesor carry out those activities.
Agreements or arrangements
9 The Minister may enter into agreements or arrangements with any department, board or agency of
the Government of Canada to assist the Minister in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act.
Delegation
10 The Minister may authorize the Commissioner or anyother person or body, or member of a class of
persons or bodies, to exercise any power or perform any duty or function of the Minister under this Act.
Availability of information
11(1) Information obtained, or prepared from information obtained, under thisAct may be made
available tothe Minister of National Revenue for the administration and enforcement of the Income Tax
Act if the Minister considers it advisable and the information is made available subject to conditions that
are agreed on by the Minister and theMinister of National Revenue.
Secondary release of information
(2) The information must not be made available to any other person or body unless the Minister
considers itadvisable, the information is made available for the same purpose and it is subject to
conditions that are agreed on by the Minister and theMinister of National Revenue.
Payment out of Consolidated Revenue Fund
12 (1) All amounts to be expended in relation to this Act, including amounts payable by the Minister
under section 3 and the costs of administering and enforcing this Act, are to be paidout of the
Consolidated Revenue Fund to the Corporation.
Special account
(2) The Corporation may pay or cause to be paid all or any part of the money paid out to it under
subsection (1) to the Receiver General, to be paid into the Consolidated Revenue Fund and credited to a
special account in the accounts of Canada in the Corporation’s name.
Payments charged to special account
(3) If money is credited to the special account under subsection (2),
(a) the Minister of National Revenue may, at the request and on behalf of the Corporation,
make payments out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for thepurposes of this Act and those
payments are to be charged to the special account; and
b) money owing to His Majesty under this Act is to be deposited into the Consolidated
Revenue Fund and, unless the special account has been closed under paragraph 28(2)(b),
credited to the special account.
Social Insurance Number
13 The Minister is authorized to collect and use, for the purposes of the administration and enforcement
of this Act, the Social Insurance Number of a person who makesan application under this Act.
Provision of information and documents
14 (1) The Minister may, for any purpose related to verifying compliance or preventing non-compliance
with this Act, require that any person provide any information or document within the reasonable time
that theMinister may specify.
Ineligibility
(2) The Minister may decide that an applicant who fails to fulfill or comply with a requirement under
subsection (1) is ineligible for a rental housing benefit.
Benefit cannot be charged, etc.
15 A rental housing benefit
(a) is not subject to the operation of any law relating 2to bankruptcy or insolvency;
(b) cannot be assigned, charged, attached or given as security;
(c) cannot be retained by way of deduction, set-off or compensation under any Act of
Parliament other thanthis Act; and
(d) is not garnishable moneys for the purposes of the Family Orders and Agreements
Enforcement Assistance Act.
Reconsideration of application
16 (1) Subject to subsection (5), the Minister may reconsider an application within 24 months after the
120th day after the reference day.
Decision
(2) If the Minister decides on reconsideration that a person has received money by way of a rental
housing benefit to which they were not entitled, or has not received money to which they were entitled,
the Minister must calculate the amount of the money and notify the person of the Minister’s decision.
Amount repayable
(3) Section 18 applies if theMinister decides that a person has received money by way of abenefit to
which they were not entitled.
Amount payable
(4) If the Minister decides that a person was entitled to receive money by way of a rental housing
benefit, and the money was not paid, theamount calculated under sub-section (2) is payable to the
person.
Extended time to reconsider claim
(5) If, in the opinion of the Minister, a false or misleading statement or representation has been made in
connection with an application for a rental housing benefit, the Minister has 72 monthswithin which to
reconsiderthe application.
Request for review
17 (1) A person who is the subject of a decision of the Minister made under this Act may make a request
to the Minister, in the form and manner established by the Minister, for a review of that decision at any
time within90 days after the day on which they are notified of the decision or any further time that the
Minister may allow.
Review
(2) The Minister must review the decision if a request for its review is made under subsection (1). On
completion ofthe review, the Minister must confirm, vary or rescindthe decision.
Notification
(3) The Minister must notify the person who made the request of the result of the Minister’s review
under subsection (2).
Return of overpayment or erroneous payment
18 (1) Ifthe Minister determines that a person has received a rental housing benefit to which they are
not entitled, or an amount in excess of the amount of such a benefit to which they are entitled, the
person must repay the amount of the payment orthe excess amount, as the case may be, as soon as
feasible.
Recovery as debt due to His Majesty
(2) The amount of the erroneous payment or overpayment, as determined by the Minister, constitutes a
debt due to His Majesty as of the day on which the amount was paid andthe debtis payable and may be
recoveredby the Minister as of the day the Minister determined the amount of the erroneous payment
or overpayment.
Limitation or prescription period
19 (1) Subject to this section, no action or proceedingsmay be taken to recover money owing under this
Act after the end of the six-year limitation or prescription period that begins on the day on which the
money becomes due and payable.
Deduction, set-off or compensation
(2) Money owing by a person under this Act may be recovered at any time by way of deduction from, or
set-off or compensation against, any sum of money, including a rental housing benefit, that may be due
or payable by His Majesty to the person, other than an amount payable under section122.61 of the
IncomeTax Act.
Acknowledgment of liability
(3) If a person’s liability for money owing under this Act is acknowledged in accordance with subsection
(5), the time during which the limitation or prescription period has run before the acknowledgment does
not count in the calculation of that period.
Acknowledgment after limitation or prescription period
(4) If a person’s liability for money owing under this Act is acknowledged in accordance with subsection
(5) after the end of the limitation or prescription period, an action or proceedings to recover the money
may, subject to subsections (3) and (6), be brought within six years after the date of the
acknowledgment.
Types of acknowledgments
(5) An acknowledgment of liability means
(a) a written promise to pay themoney owing, signed by the person or their agent or other
representative;
(b) a written acknowledgment of the money owing, signed by the person or their agent or
other representative, whether or not a promise to pay can be implied from it and whether or
not it contains a refusal to pay;
(c) a part payment by the person or their agent or other representative of any money
owing; or
(d) any acknowledgment of the money owing made by the person, their agent or other
representative or the trustee or administrator in the course of proceedings under the
Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act or any other legislation dealing with the payment of debts.
Limitation or prescription period suspended
(6) The running of a limitation or prescription period in respect of money owing under this Act is
suspended during any period in whichit is prohibited to commence orcontinue an action or other
proceedings against the person to recover money owing under this Act.
Non-application
(7) This section does not apply in respect of an action or proceedings relating to the execution, renewal
or enforcement of a judgment.
No interest payable
20 No interest is payable on any amount owing to His Majesty under this Act as a result of an
overpayment or an erroneous payment.
Violations
21 (1) A person commits a violation if they
(a) knowingly make, in relation to an application for a rental housing benefit, a
representation that is false or misleading; or
(b) make an application for, and receive, a rental housing benefit knowing that they are not
eligible to receive it.
Penalty
(2) The Minister may impose a penalty on a person if the Minister is of the opinion that the person has
committed a violation.
Amount of penalty
(3) The Minister may set the amount of the penalty for each violation at not more than 50% of the
benefitthatwas or would have been paid as a result of committing the violation.
For greater certainty
(4) For greater certainty, no penalty may be imposed on a person if they mistakenly believe that a
representation is true or that they were eligible to receive the benefit, asthe case may be.
Purpose of penalty
(5) The purpose of a penalty is to promote compliance with this Act and not to punish.
Limitation of imposition of penalties
22 A penalty must not be imposed under section 21 if more than three years have passed after the day
on which the act that would constitute the violation occurred.
Rescission or reduction of penalty
23 The Minister may rescind the imposition of a penalty under section 21, or reduce the penalty, on the
presentation of new facts or on being of the opinion that the penalty was imposed without knowledge
of, or on the basis of a mistake as to, some material fact.
Recovery as debt due to His Majesty
24 A penalty imposed under section21 constitutes a debt due to His Majesty and the debt is payable
and may be recovered by the Minister as of the day on which the penalty is imposed.
Offences
25 (1) Everyperson commits an offence who
(a) for the purpose of obtaining a rentalhousing benefit for themselves, knowingly uses
false identity information or another person’s identity information; or
(b) with intent to steal all or a substantial part of another person’s rental housing benefit,
counsels thatperson to apply for the benefit.
Punishment
(2) Every person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable on summary conviction to a
fine of not more than the sum of $5,000 plus an amount of not more than double the amount of the
benefit that was orwould have been paid as a result of committing the offence, to imprisonment for a
term of not more than two years less a day, or to both.
Definition of identity information
(3) In paragraph (1)(a), identity information has the same meaning as in section 402.1 of the Criminal
Code.
Designation—investigators
26 (1) The Minister may designate as an investigator any person or class of persons for the purpose of
enforcing section 25.
Authorization
(2) The Minister may authorize the Commissioner to designate as an investigator any employee or class
of employees of the Agency for the purpose of enforcing section 25.
Limitation period
27 Proceedings in respectof an offence under this Actmay be instituted at any time within, but not later
than, five years after the day on which the Minister becomes aware of the subject matter of the
prosecution.
Sunset provision
28 (1) Despite any other provision of this Act, a payment out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund must
not bemade under section 12 after the fifth anniversary of the dayon which this Act comes into force.
Consolidated Revenue Fund
(2) On the day after that fifth anniversary,
(a) any money paid out under subsection 12(1) and held on that day by the Corporation is
to be paid into the Consolidated Revenue Fund and credited to the Receiver General; and
(b) any special account referred to in subsection 12(2) is closed and any money inthat
account on closing is to remain in the Consolidated Revenue Fund and iscredited to the
Receiver General.
PART 3
Related Amendments
R.S., c. 1 (5th Supp.) Income Tax Act
4 Subsection 81(1) of the Income Tax Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (r), by
adding “or” at the end of paragraph (s) and by adding the following after paragraph(s):
Dental benefits
(t) an amount received under the Dental Benefit Act.
5 Paragraph 241(4)(d) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of subparagraph (xviii) and
by addingthe following after subparagraph (xix):
(xx) to an official of
(A) the Canada Revenue Agency solely for the purposes of the administration or
enforcement of the Dental Benefit Act, or
(B) the Department of Health solely for the purposes of the formulation or
evaluation of policy for that Act,
(xxi) to an official of the Canada Revenue Agency solely for the purposes of the
administration or enforcement of the Rental Housing Benefit Act, or
(xxii) to a person who is employed in the service of, who occupies a position of responsibility
in the service of, or who is engaged by or on behalf of, the Canada Mortgage and Housing
Corporation, solely for the purposes of theformulation or evaluation ofpolicy for the Rental
Housing Benefit Act;
R.S., c. E-15 Excise Tax Act
6 Paragraph 295(5)(d) of the Excise Tax Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of subparagraph
(ix) and by adding the following after subparagraph (x):
(xi) to an official of
(A) theCanada Revenue Agency solely for the purposes of the administration or
enforcement of the Dental Benefit Act, or
(B) the Department of Health solely for the purposes of the formulation or
evaluation of policy for that Act,
(xii) to an official of the Canada Revenue Agency solely for the purposes of the
administration or enforcement of the Rental Housing Benefit Act, or
(xiii) to a person who is employed in the service of, who occupies a position of responsibility
in the service of, or who is engaged by oron behalf of, the Canada Mortgage and Housing
Corporation, solely for the purposes of theformulation or evaluation ofpolicy for the Rental
Housing Benefit Act;
2002, c. 22Excise Act, 2001
7 Paragraph 211(6)(e) of the Excise Act, 2001 is amended by striking out “or” at the end of subparagraph
(x) and by adding the following after subparagraph (xi):
(xii) to an official of
(A) the Agency solely for the purposes of the administration or enforcement of the
Dental Benefit Act, or
(B) the Department of Health solely for the purposes of the formulation or
evaluation of policyfor that Act,
(xiii) to an official of the Agency solely for the purposes of the administration or enforcement
of the Rental Housing Benefit Act, or
(xiv) to a person who is employed in the service of,who occupies a position of responsibility
in the service of, or who is engaged by or on behalf of, the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation,
solely for the purposes of the formulation or evaluationofpolicy for the Rental Housing Benefit Act;
Published under authority of the Speaker of the House of Commons
Available on the House of Commons website at the following address:www.ourcommons.ca
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
DENTAL CARE
Challengesaccessing the Canada Dental Benefit for potential recipients who do not file taxes.
KEY FACTS
• Applications for the Canada Dental Benefit will rely on income verification performed by the
Canada Revenue Agency, based on the previous year’s tax return.
• It is estimated that approximately 10-12% of Canadians may not be receiving benefits to which
they may otherwise be entitled because they do not file tax returns.
• People who have low household incomes, newcomers to Canada and members of marginalized
groups may be part of this group.
• Some of these groups, such as newcomers to Canada, will continue to be able to apply for
benefits through initiatives such as the Interim Federal Health Program, administered by Immigration,
Refugees and Citizenship Canada.
• Potential barriers to filing include a lack of understanding of the relationship between filing an
income tax return and benefit eligibility, not having a bank account, not having a stable address, not
having regular access to the internet or to a telephone, or not having access to identity documents.
KEY MESSAGES
• Public education on the importance of filing a tax return and the relationship between tax filing
and benefit eligibility will be an important part of ensuring that the Canada Dental Benefitreaches those
who need it most.
• The Canada Revenue Agency already provides robust support to help Canadians file their taxes if
they need assistance. Health Canada will work closely with CRA to support tax filing and, in turn, uptake
of this benefit.
• The Canada Dental Benefit is the first stage of the Government’s plan to deliver dental care for
families with income under $90,000 who do not have access to dental insurance, starting with uninsured
families withchildren under the age of 12.
• As we workto develop the long-term program to provide coverage to under 18-year-olds,
seniors and persons living with a disability, the needs of these vulnerable populations will be taken into
account.
BACKGROUND
Because this benefit will be disbursed through the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA), people who do not
currently file taxes, or who are otherwise not engaged with the existing federal benefits infrastructure,
will not have access to it.
Tax Non-Filers in Canada
Eligible individuals will only be able to apply for the Canada Dental Benefit through existing CRA
infrastructure, either online through MyAccount or by telephone through the CRA call centres. In order
to determine eligibility, CRA will calculate family income based on the last year’s tax return. Thismeans
that individuals who do not file taxes, or whose household members do not, will not be eligible for the
benefit.
It is estimated that approximately 10-12% of Canadians do not file a tax return annually. In one study,
people whose family income was below the Market Basket Measure were the least likely to file taxes,
and approximately one-fifth of working-age adults inthe bottom decile for family income did not file a
return. People with a high school degree only, newcomers to Canada, and people who rented, rather
than owned, their homes, were also less likely to file. This raises the concern that some of the
individuals the Canada Dental Benefit is attempting to reach may not be eligible for the benefit due to
tax return non-filing.
Barriers to Accessing Benefits for Children through CRA Delivery
Since the Canada Dental Benefit will be available to eligible families currently receiving the Canada Child
Benefit, uptake of the Canada Child Benefit may serve as a reasonable proxy for estimating uptake of
the dental benefit.
In the first year of availability, approximately 12% of eligible families did not receive the Canada Child
Benefit. The reasons for this are likely to be complex and multi-factorial, but may include a lack of
understanding of the relationship between filing an income tax return and benefit eligibility, not having
a bank account, not having a stableaddress, not having regular access to the internet or to a telephone,
or not having access to identity documents. Members of marginalized groups may also be reluctant to
provide personal information to the Government of Canada in order to receive the benefit, due to a lack
of trust in government.
Mitigations
Given that income must be assessed in some way for this income-tested program, and the need to
develop and implement this benefit quickly using existing systems and definitions, the focus will be on
helping those individuals file their taxes in order to become eligible. By doing so, they may also become
eligible for other government benefits. The benefit application periods are long and would allow
sufficient time for someone to file taxes and then return to apply for the benefit, should they wish.
DENTAL CARE
P/T Jurisdiction
ISSUE
• Whether the federal government can deliver a Canada Dental Benefit, in light of PT jurisdiction
over health care delivery.
KEY FACTS
• Under the Canada Health Act, provinces/territories (PTs) provide residents with medically or
dentally required emergency/catastrophic surgical-dental procedures performed by a dentist in hospital
as publicly-insured services. Outside of those services, PTs are not required to provide dental care under
the public health care system.
• All PTs provide additional dental coverage, at their discretion, although eligibility and coverage is
limited and varies greatly.
• In total, PTs spend an estimated $650 million a year on public dental programs.
• The federal government also plays a key role in health care in Canada. It is able to use its
spending power, as long it is done in a manner that does not amount to regulation of a space that is
under PT jurisdiction, which the proposed benefit does not.
KEY MESSAGES
• Although health care delivery is under provincial and territorialjurisdiction, the federal
government continues to play an important role in health care in Canada and, in fact, we already play a
significant role in dental care delivery for federal populations.
• It is within our jurisdiction to exercise the federal spending power to provide support to
Canadians and that is what we are doing here-so that they can get the help they need to make dental
care for their children more affordable.
• We remain committed to finding ways to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to
improve access to oral health in Canada.
DENTAL CARE
Concerns that the interim Canada Dental Benefit will duplicate coverage provided through provincial
and territorial dental care programs.
KEY FACTS
• Under the proposed legislation (Bill C-31), starting in 2022, families with children under 12 that
have an income of less than $90,000, will be able to apply for up to $650 for each eligible child in each of
two annual benefit periods.
• To be eligible, the child must not have access to private dental care insurance or have their out-
of-pocket dental care expenses fully reimbursed through a different government program.
• Applicants covered by provincial or territorial programs will be eligible for the interim Canada
Dental Benefit if they meet all of the criteria to qualify for the benefit. However, people whose dental
care needs are met by those provincial and territorial program and who, as a result, don’t have out of
pocket costs that are not fully reimbursed, won’t be eligible for the benefit and shouldn’t apply.
• On October 20, 2022, the Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer (PBO) released a Legislative
Parliamentary Note that included a supplementary information table with estimates of costs for the
interim Canada Dental Benefit for each province.
• Some MPs have expressed concerns that these costing estimates imply that Quebec and Atlantic
provinces with robust programs for children would be receiving a disproportionate amount of funding.
• The proposed delivery model for the interim benefit does not include funding to the provinces
or territories–rather the Canada Revenue Agency will make payments directly to eligible Canadians
through the tax system.
The eligibility criteria and level ofpayment will be the same for all Canadians across the country.
KEY MESSAGES
• The interim Canada Dental Benefit is intended to help parents with children under 12 manage
the costs for their children’s dental care that they would otherwise be out of pocket for. This is an
important measure that the Government of Canada is taking to make life more affordable for the
youngest Canadians who need it most.
• This interim benefit is intended to complement and not duplicate coverage provided by existing
dentalprograms delivered by provincial governments, while wework on a longer-term solution.
• Applicants covered by provincial or territorial programs will be eligible for the interim Canada
Dental Benefit if they meet all of the criteria to qualify for thebenefit. However, people whose dental
care needs are met by those provincial and territorial programs and who, as a result, don’t have out of
pocket costs that are fully reimbursed, won’t be eligible for the benefit and shouldn’t apply.
If pressed ondistribution of funding by province
• Provincial and territorial dental programs for children vary widely in terms of who and what is
covered. For example, in Quebec where a universal program exists for children under 10, important
preventative services are not covered (and older children are not covered at all).
• In those cases, families living in those jurisdictions with out-of-pocket expenses over and above
what those programs cover will still be eligible to apply for the interim Canada Dental Benefit.
• The proposed delivery model for the interim benefit does not include funding to the provinces
or territories–rather the Canada Revenue Agency will make payments directly to eligible Canadians
through the tax system.
• The eligibility criteria and level of payment will be the same for all Canadians across the country.
DENTAL CARE
Fiscal implications of interim Canada Dental Benefit
KEY FACTS
• Funding to deliver the interim Canada Dental Benefit is sourced from Budget 2022, which
provided funding of$5.3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $1.7 billion ongoing to Health
Canada to provide dental care for Canadians.
• It is estimated that over 500,000 Canadian children could benefit from this targeted investment
of $938 million.
• On October 20, 2022, the Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer (PBO) released a Legislative
Parliamentary Note that estimated the cost of the interim Canada Dental Benefit to be $703M.
• Health Canada officials have met with the PBO’s office to discuss itscosting and have
determined that the variances are primarily due to some minor differences in assumptions (e.g., Health
Canada did not forecast savings from reduced Medical Expense Tax credits, as the PBO did) and to the
treatment of administrative costs.
• Health Canada cost estimates include start up and close-out costs for the interim benefit, as well
as policy development, program oversight and compliance efforts, additional resources for the Canada
Revenue Agency contact centres who will help applicants and answer questions, and outreach and
communication costs.
• These investments take into account the need to raise awareness of this benefit among eligible
parents and to maintain the integrity of the program, given it relies on an attestation model for some
information.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada has committed to improving access to dental care and, in Budget
2022, proposed funding of $5.3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $1.7 billion on-going for a
national dental careprogram for Canadians who earn under $90,000 a year.
• The cost of the interim Canada Dental Benefit will be fully covered within the funding
announced for dental care in Budget 2022.
• It is estimated that over 500,000 Canadian children could benefit from this targeted investment
of over $900 million.
• The interim Canada Dental Benefit, focusing on children under 12, is the first stage of the
government’s plan to deliver dental care for families with income under $90,000 who do not have
access to dentalinsurance.
If pressed on PBO report
• The Government of Canada welcomes and appreciates the cost estimates prepared by the PBO
regarding theinterim Canada Dental Benefit.
• Health Canada officials have met with the PBO’s office to discuss its costingand have
determined that the variances are primarily due to some minor differences in assumptions (e.g., Health
Canada did not forecast savings from reduced Medical Expense Tax credits, as the PBO did) and to the
treatment of administrative costs.
• Moreover, Health Canada costs estimates included its work related to providing dental care for
Canadians–both the interim Canada Dental Benefit and the planned national dental care program.
DENTAL CARE
Impact of the Canada Dental Benefit on existing oral health human resources.
KEY FACTS
• There are an estimated 90,000 oral health professionals practicing in Canada, including
approximately 25,000 dentists, 30,000 dental hygienists, and 30,000 dental assistants.
• Although the Canadian DentalAssociation reported that 36% of dental offices have vacant
positions for assistants, and the Canadian Dental Hygienists Association reported in 2021 that 28% of
dental hygienists planned to leave the profession within the next five years, dental care experts
consistently report that there is sufficient capacity among dentists except in some rural and remote
areas.
• Rural, remote, Northern, and inner-city regions are most likely to experience a shortage of
dental services currently. Specialist dentists, particularly those with expertise in the care of patients with
complex needs, are also in particular demand.
• The interim Canada Dental Benefit, on its own, is unlikely to exacerbate these concerns in the
short-term. The benefit will provide sufficient funding, in most cases, for a single visit each year and not
all families will apply for or receive the benefit at once.
• In rural areas, the fact that the benefit could be used to access care by not just a dentist but also
independently practising dental hygienists, will help facilitate access to care.
KEY MESSAGES
• The issue of health human resources, including for dental care professionals, is one that is being
closely monitored by the Government of Canada.
• We believe that, at this time, there are sufficient dental professionals to meet the additional
demand from children who will be able to care get because of this benefit.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with stakeholders from each of the oral health
care professions, including professional associations and independent experts, to promote awareness of
the Canada Dental Benefit and discuss health human resources issues that need to be considered as part
of the long term program.
DENTAL CARE
Impact of theCanada Dental Benefit on Indigenous people, governments and organizations.
KEY FACTS
• The Canada Dental Benefit does not affect the NIHB program or the amount of funding provided
to Indigenous governments and organizations.
• NIHB recipients will continue to have access to the robust dental coverage available to them
under that program.
• First Nations and Inuit people that receive dental coverage through the Non-Insured Health
Benefits (NIHB) program will be eligible to apply for the benefit if they meet all of the other criteria for
the benefit.
• Government of Canada officials anticipate that, in most cases, NIHB will meet the needs of
recipients and that they will not have out of pocket expenses for their dental care, which is a key
eligibility requirement of the benefit.
• As part of the broader outreach and communications strategy to promote the Canada Dental
Benefit, Health Canada will work with Indigenous organizations and governments to reach potential
applicants not covered by NIHB. This includes, but is not limited to, Métis people.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to working closely with Indigenous partners and
communities across the country to advance priorities that promote and protect health, including dental
care.
• The Canada Dental Benefit would not replace the Non-Insured Health Benefits program,
delivered by Indigenous Services Canada. Recipients will continue to have access to the robust dental
coverage available to them under the Non-Insured Health Benefits program.
• Non-Insured Health Benefits recipients will be eligible to apply for the benefit if they meet all of
the other criteria for the benefit.
• Heath Canada anticipates that, in most cases, the Non-Insured Health Benefits program will
meet the needs ofrecipients and they will not have out of pocket expenses for their dental care, which
is a key eligibility requirement of the benefit.
BACKGROUND
First Nations people and Inuit that receive dental coverage through the NIHB could apply for the Canada
Dental Benefit if they meet eligibility criteria. In addition, it is anticipated that the benefit could reach a
significant number of Métis people, as well as people without dental coverage living in Indigenous
communities.
Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) Program
The Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) Program provides coverage for a range of medically necessary
benefits to over 900,000 registered First Nations people and recognized Inuit. All registered First Nations
and recognized Inuit residents of Canada are eligible for NIHB benefits, regardless of location or income
level, unless otherwise covered under a separate agreement with federal or provincial governments, or
through a separate self-government agreement.
As the NIHB program is restricted to First Nations people and Inuit registered under the Indian Act and
their children under 18 months, the program captures around half of those with anIndigenous identity.
In 2021-22, dental expenditures through the NIHB program were approximately $300 million, with the
majority of expenditures (90%) in fee-for-service (FFS) benefits. FFS dental expenditures generally
increase 5-9% per year based on a Consumer Price Index + 0.5% formula. Approximately 2.34 million FFS
dental claims were for 314,114 clients (85% of these clients accessed diagnostic services, 70%
preventative, and 52% restorative).
Each year, approximately 37% of eligible clients accessthe NIHB dental benefits available to them. Over
two years, this increases to about 50%. There are approximately 25,000 registered service providers
providing care to this client population.
DENTAL CARE
Urgent needfor bill to receive Royal Assent no later than October 31, 2022
KEY FACTS
• The Government of Canada has introduced legislation in the House of Commons that includes
the implementation of the new, temporary Canada Dental Benefit.
• Bill C-31 is a key stepin delivering on the Government’s Budget 2022 commitment, which
committed to provide support starting with children under 12 in 2022.
• The target implementation date for the Canada Dental Benefit is December 1, 2022, pending
Parliamentary approval and Royal Assent of enabling legislation.
• In order to be able to open the system for applications on December 1, 2022 and for children to
begin to access care with the benefit funding this calendar year as committed, the proposed legislation
must receive Royal Assent by the end of October.
• If Royal Assent is not received by then, Health Canada and the Canada Revenue Agency may not
have time to complete the necessary preparations to support delivery of the benefit for a December 1
start.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is working diligently to design and implement a long-term national
dental care program; this is complex work that will take time.
• In the meantime, the proposed Canada Dental Benefit would help provide parents withchildren
under 12 with financial support to help address theirchildren’s dental care needs.
• The target implementation date for the Canada Dental Benefit is December 1, 2022, pending
Parliamentary approval and Royal Assent of enabling legislation.
DENTAL CARE
The likely impact of the Canada Dental Benefit on children under 12.
KEY FACTS
• 57% of children aged six to 11 have had a cavity, with an average of 2.5 teeth affected by decay.
• In more severe cases, tooth decay in young children (early childhood caries) is an infectious
disease that can cause pain, interfere with sleep and growth, and cause lifelong impacts to oral and
general health.
• Dental surgery is a partial consequence of inadequate access to preventive care.Dental surgery
under general anaesthesia is the most common day surgery at most pediatric hospitals in Canada,
accounting for one-third of all day surgeries performed on children between the ages of one and five.
The rate of surgeries is 2.5 times higherfor children in the lowest income quintile, and 3.1 times higher
among children living in rural neighbourhoods.
• The prevalence of tooth decay is much higher among Inuit –in 2011, more than 85% of Inuit
preschoolers had dental cavities, with a mean of 8.2 teeth affected.
• An estimated 2.26 million school days were lost to oral health concerns in 2010.
• It is estimated that over 500,000 Canadian children could benefit from this targeted investment
of $938 million.
KEY MESSAGES
• Access to quality dental care is an integral part of overall health and quality of life for Canadians.
• Poor oral health disproportionately impacts children from low-income families, Indigenous
children, new immigrants, and children with disabilities or special health care needs.
• Giving Canadian families the means to improve their children’s oral health through the Canada
Dental Benefit will mean those children have access to the care they need to not only improve their oral
health but also improve their quality of life andreduce the need for more invasive and costly treatments
later.
• The benefit proposed in this legislation would help break the cycle of poor oral health for the
youngest Canadians by making access to dental care for children more affordable.
DENTAL CARE
Measures undertaken to prevent fraudulent applications for Canada Dental Benefit payments
KEY FACTS
• The Government of Canada is undertaking a variety of measures to protect against fraudulent
applications for Canada Dental Benefit payments.
• The Canada Revenue Agency will utilize multi-factor authentication to verify applicants and has
a range of tools at its disposal to conduct compliance and enforcement activities.
• The Canada Revenue Agency will verify most eligibility information upfront drawing on its
existing tax and Canada Child Benefit systems (like income, age of children and the applicant’s
relationship to the child/ children), and when applying, an eligible parent will also be asked to provide
information on the following to help confirm eligibility:
- provide contact information for the dental professional who did or will provide the dental
services,
- provide contact information for their employer, if they have one, for purposes of verifying
access to an employer dentalcare plan; and
- provide any other information requested to verify their eligibility.
• In addition, the bill provides considerable scope for post-payment compliance activities to help
ensure this funding is spent as intended. Applicants will be aware theywill need to be able to
demonstrate eligibility–for example by providing receipts showing they had the out of pocket expenses
they attested to having, if asked to by CRA.
• The Minister of Health can also decide that a person is ineligible for future benefits if they have
committed a violation or misrepresented their eligibility information. However, this remedy would only
relate to the period of moving from year one to year two benefits, given there would be no future
benefits to deny for those who were found fraudulent in year two. In those cases, other measures
described above could still be considered.
KEY MESSAGES
• This legislation will provide the Government with a number of tools to prevent fraudulent
applications for payment under the Canada Dental Benefit and to take action when fraud or other
criminal offenses related to the benefit occur.
• Applicants’ income eligibility, presence of children and their age will be verified at the time an
application is made, through CRA’s existing informationsystems, before a payment is made.
• Applicants will be made aware that they will need to be able to demonstrate that they met the
remaining eligibility conditions. This includes demonstrating that they had out of pocket costs, which
they used the benefitto pay for, as intended (for example, by showing their receipts).
• In addition, the Canada Revenue Agency continues to enhance the security of its digital services
to protect Canadians from fraudulent activity. These include using security features suchas multi-factor
authentication and making email addresses mandatory for those who use Canada Revenue Agency’s My
Account.
BACKGROUND
The Canada Revenue Agency will utilize multi-factor authentication to verify applicants’ eligibility and
has a range of tools at its disposal to conduct compliance and enforcement activities.
The Canada Revenue Agency will verify information in its existing tax and Canada Child Benefit systems
(like income, age of children and the applicant’s relationship to the child/ children), and when applying,
an eligible parent will also be asked to provide information on the following to help confirm eligibility:
- provide contact information for the dental professional who did or will provide the dental
services,
- provide contact information for their employer, if they have one, for purposes of verifying
access to an employer dental care plan; and
- provide any other information requested to verify their eligibility.
In addition, after the fact verification and audit processes will be used, according to CRA’s standard
practices and using the powers set out in the Bill. Where concerns are identified, funding could be
recovered although this would be particularly difficult –based on past CRA experience–to do in the
lower income groups.
For particularly serious offenses, the bill also defines criminal offenses in relation to benefits provided
for under the Act, such as using false identity information, as well as punishment for offenses, including
fines and possible imprisonment. It states that a person commits a violation if they:
- give false or misleading information on their application; or
- apply for, and receive, a dental benefit for which they are not eligible.
Furthermore, the bill states that if the Minister of Health, or the Minister of National Revenue, as
delegated by the Minister of Health, is of the opinion that a person has committed a violation, the
Minister may impose a penalty:
- up to 50% of the benefit that was or would have been paid;
- to a maximum of $5,000;
- within three years of the day on which the violation was committed.
The Minister of Health can also decide that a person is ineligible for future benefits if they have
committed a violation or misrepresented their eligibility information, although this remedy would only
relate in the period of moving from year one to year two benefits, given there would be no year 3
benefits to deny for those who were found fraudulent in year two. In those cases, other measures
described above could still be considered.
DENTAL CARE
Marketing and Advertising for the Canada Dental Benefit
KEY FACTS
• The Government of Canada will launch an advertising campaign for the Canada Dental Benefit
once Royal Assent is receive and the application process is open, with tailored messaging posted to a
Canada Dental Benefit website, a joint collaboration between Health Canada and the Canada Revenue
Agency.
• The focus of the campaign will be to raise awareness of the Canada Dental Benefit, including
eligibility and the application process.
• Stakeholders (e.g., provincial and territorial dental associations and other interested parties) will
be encouraged to promote the benefit website on their respective websites, and to share and like social
media content.
• A digital toolkit will be developed in 2022-23 for distribution to partners and stakeholders (e.g.
otherfederal departments, provinces and territories, dental associations and dentists, schools,
community-based organizations and intermediaries or ambassadors in relevant communities).
• Updates will be made to the toolkit on an as-needed basis, based on target audiences.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government is committed to improving access to oral health services.
• It will be important for us to work to make sure eligible parents of children under 12 hear about
and understand how this benefit will work so they can access the support we are providing.
• A comprehensive public education campaign is being planned.
• Early communications ahead of the advertising campaign will encourage key audiences to sign
up for both CRA My Account and direct deposit in order tofacilitate the quick processingof the dental
benefit payment.
• Content will also focus on ensuring that Canadians are aware of and capitalize on key dates,
events and announcements. Updates to the website will be made on an as-needed basis, based on
target audiences and benefit eligibility.
DENTAL CARE
Government of Canada is working toward a long term dental care program
KEY FACTS
• The Government of Canada has committed to making access to dental care more affordable.
Budget2022 proposed funding of $5.3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $1.7 billion
ongoing for a national dental care program for Canadians who earn under $90,000.
• The Canada Dental Benefit is an interim measure that will allow Canadian families to access
funding as soon as possible to begin dealing with some of their eligible children’s dental care needs.
While this temporary program is in place, the Government of Canada is working to build a national
dental care program.
• Discussions with key stakeholders, including provinces and territories, as well as industry and
clinical experts, are ongoing to help inform the Government’s decisions on implementing a national
dental care program.
• Health Canada is in the process of analyzing feedback submitted by industry partners over the
summer through a Request for Information, which sought input to assist in the development of advice
about the design and delivery of a national dental care program.
• In addition, the Minister of Health and Health Canada officials have been meeting with key
stakeholders, including experts, academics, and dentistry associations and organizations over the past
several months to discuss the design and delivery of a national dental care program.
• More details will be available as decisions are finalized regarding a new national dental care
program.
KEY MESSAGES
• Budget 2022 committed $5.3 billion over five years, and $1.7B ongoing, to provide dental care
for Canadians who are unable to access care because of the costs.
• The Government remains committed to providing dental care to Canadians and continues to
take the necessary steps to build a national dental care program.
• Although we are working as fast as we can, it will take time to get it right.
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with key stakeholders, industry partners,
academics, and dentistry associations and organizations to help inform decisions on implementing a
national dental care program.
• For example, the Government of Canada is currently reviewing input from industry partners that
was provided through a Request for Information issued from July 25 to August 22, 2022.
• At the same time, Health Canada has been reaching out to provinces and territories to better
understand their current dental care programs and seek their views on how best to implement a long-
term program.
• Budget 2022 committed to provide dental care starting in 2022 for families with children under
12. The Canada Dental Benefit is an important step in this direction.
Release
For immediate release
Making life more affordable for Canadians this year
September 13, 2022 St. Andrews, New Brunswick Prime Minister’s Office
Canadians are feeling the rising cost of living, particularly through higher food prices and rent. While
inflation is a global challenge–caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s illegal and unjustifiable
invasion of Ukraine–we are helping families weather its impacts by working to put more money back in
the pockets of the middle class and those working hard to join it this year.
The Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, today announced that the government’s first pieces of legislation
introduced in the upcoming Parliamentary sitting would make life more affordable for Canadians who
need it most.
The measures in these bills would:
• Double the Goods and Services Tax Credit (GSTC) for six months, delivering support to roughly
11 million individuals and families who receive the tax credit, including about half of Canadian families
with children, and more than half of Canadian seniors. Single Canadians without children would receive
up to an extra $234 and couples with two children would receive up to an extra $467 in their pockets
this year. Seniors would receive an extra $225 on average.
• Provide a Canada Dental Benefit to children under 12 who do not have access to dental
insurance, starting this year. Direct payments totalling up to $1,300 per child over the next two years
(up to $650 per year) would be provided for dentalcare services. This is the first stage of the
government’s plan to deliver dental coverage for families with income under $90,000, and will allow
children under 12 to get the dental care they need while we develop a comprehensive national dental
care program.
• Provide a one-time top-up to the Canada Housing Benefit to deliver $500 to 1.8 million Canadian
renters who are struggling with the cost of housing. This more than doubles our Budget 2022
commitment, reaching twice as many Canadians as initially promised. This new one-time federal benefit
will be in addition to the Canada Housing Benefit currently co-funded and delivered by provinces and
territories. The federal benefit will be available to applicants with an adjusted net income below $35,000
for families, or below $20,000 for individuals, who pay at least 30 per cent of their income on rent.
These measures build on the strong action we have been taking since 2015 to make life more affordable
and build an economy that works for all Canadians. From cutting taxes for the middle class and raising
them on the wealthiest one per cent, to delivering a Canada Child Benefit and raising it every year to
continue putting more money back in the pockets of nine out of 10 families with children, to cutting
regulated child care fees in half on average by the end of this year for families across the country, we are
delivering support for the middle class and those working hard to join it.
Quote
“From helping families pay rent to making sure people can afford the dental care they need and putting
hundreds of dollars back in the pockets of Canadians, this suite of new measures will support families
who need it the most, when they need it the most. As we head into a new Parliamentary sitting, we are
working hard to continue delivering results for the middle class and those working hard to join it.”
—The Rt. Hon. Justin Trudeau, Prime Minister of Canada
Quick Facts
• This targeted support package totals more than $4.5 billion, of which $3.1 billion is in addition to
funding previously allocated in Budget 2022.
• Doubling the Goods and Services Tax Credit for six months will provide $2.5 billion in relief for
Canadians who need it most.
• The Canada Dental Benefit would deliver over $900 million to support dental health, starting in
2022-23. The Canada Dental Benefit for uninsured children under the age of 12 is the first stage of the
government’s plan to deliver dental care for families with income under $90,000 who do not have
access to dental insurance. The Canada DentalBenefit would provide direct payments to eligible
applicants totalling up to $650 per year per child for dental care services for applicants with a family
income under $70,000, $390 for those with a family income of $70,000 to $79,999, and $260 for those
with a family income of $80,000 to $89,999. Parents or guardians of eligible children would need to
apply to access payments.
• A new national dental program is under development, with the goal of expanding dental
coverage to under 18-year-olds, seniors, and persons living with a disability in 2023, with full
implementation for all families with incomes under $90,000 by 2025.
• The $500 payment for renters doubles our commitment made in Budget 2022, providing $1.2
billion in relief for 1.8 million eligibleCanadians.
• In addition to today’s announcement, the following measures will support Canadians this year:
o Enhancing the Canada Workers Benefit at a cost of $1.7 billion in new support for an estimated
three million low-income workers this year, with a couple receiving up to $2,400 more this year, and
single workers receiving up to $1,200 more. Most recipients first received this additional support
through their 2021 tax refund.
o Cutting regulated child care fees in half on average for families in Canadaby the end of this year.
o A 10 per cent increase to the Old Age Security (OAS) pension for seniors 75 years and older,
which began in July 2022, and will provide more than $800 in new support to full pensioners over the
first year, and increase the number of beneficiaries by more than three million seniors.
o Providing more support for students by doubling the Canada Student Grant amount until July
2023 and by waiving interest on Canada Student Loans through to March 2023.
• Here’s how we will make life more affordable for Canadians this year:
o A couple in Ontario with an income of $45,000 and a child in daycare could receive about an
additional $7,800 above existing benefits this fiscal year.
o A single recent graduate, living in Alberta, with an entry-level job and an income of $24,000
could receive an approximate additional $1,300 in new and enhanced benefits.
o A senior with a disability in Quebec could benefit from over $2,500 more this year than she
received last year.
• Canada has the lowest total government deficit in the G7 this year, and by far the lowest net
debt burden among these countries (32.1 per cent of GDP versus an average of 97.5 per cent of GDP for
the group as a whole).
• The International Monetary Fund and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development predict that the Canadian economy will see the strongest growth in the G7 this year and
next.
Related Products
• Backgrounder: Making Dental Care More Affordable: The Canada Dental Benefit
• Backgrounder: MakingHousing More Affordable: One-time top-up to the Canada Housing
Benefit program
• Backgrounder: Making Life More Affordable: Doubling the Goods and Services Tax Credit for Six
Months
Associated Links
• Affordability Plan
• Deputy Prime Minister outlines government’s Affordability Plan for Canadians
• Government of Canada releases Budget 2022
• Prime Minister to hold Cabinet retreat in Vancouver to focus on making life more affordable for
Canadians
PMO Media Relations: media@pmo-cpm.gc.ca
This document isalso available athttps://pm.gc.ca
Government of Canada introduces legislation to make life more affordable for Canadians
Legislation would double the GST Credit for six months, introduce the Canada DentalBenefit, and top-up
the Canada Housing Benefit
September 20, 2022
Today, the government introduced its first two pieces of legislation for this Parliamentary sitting, which
would deliver targeted support to the Canadians who need it most. These measures build on the
government’s Affordability Plan, which has already been putting more money back in the pockets of the
middle class and those working hard to join it this year.
Bill C-30, the Cost of Living Relief Act, No. 1 (Targeted Tax Relief), would double the Goods and Services
Tax Credit for six months.
• Doubling the GST Credit would provide $2.5 billion in additional targeted support to the roughly
11 million individuals and families who already receive the tax credit, including about half of Canadian
families with children and more than half of Canadianseniors. Single Canadians without children would
receive up to an extra $234 and couples with two children would receive up to an extra $467 this year.
Seniors would receive an extra $225 on average.
Bill C-31, the Cost of Living Relief Act, No. 2 (Targeted Support for Households), would enact two
important measures: the Canada Dental Benefit and a one-time top-up to the Canada Housing Benefit.
• The Canada Dental Benefit would be provided to childrenunder 12 who do not have access to
dental insurance, starting this year. Direct payments totalling up to $1,300 per child over the next two
years (up to $650 per year) would be provided for dental care services. This is the first stage of the
government’splan to deliver dental coverage for families with adjusted net income under $90,000, and
will allow children under 12 to receive the dental care they need while the government works to
develop a comprehensive national dental care program.
• The one-time top-up to the Canada Housing Benefit would deliver a $500 payment to 1.8 million
renters who are struggling with the cost of housing. This more than doubles the government’s Budget
2022 commitment, reaching twice as many Canadians as initially promised. The federal benefit will be
available to applicants with an adjusted net income below $35,000 for families, or below $20,000 for
individuals, who pay at least 30 per cent of their adjusted net income on rent.
The Canada Revenue Agency’s (CRA) application portals for the Canada Dental Benefit and Canada
Housing Benefit will be available to Canadians following Royal Assent of Bill C-31.
The legislation tabled in Parliament today represents the latest suite of measures to support Canadians
with the rising costof living without adding fuel to the fire of inflation. The government’s Affordability
Plan is delivering targeted and fiscally responsible financial support to the Canadians who need it most,
with particular emphasis on addressing the needs of low-income Canadians who are most exposed to
inflation.
Quotes
“With the legislation we have introduced today, we are building on the supports in our government’s
Affordability Plan to deliver timely, effective financial help to millions of Canadians to make ends meet.
For our neighbours who need this support the most, this means more money for them this year to help
make life more affordable. We will continue to strike a balance between delivering support where and
when it is needed most and maintaining the discipline that has given Canada the strongest fiscal position
in the G7.”
-The Honourable Randy Boissonnault, Minister of Tourism and Associate Minister of Finance
“Oral health is just as important as healthy eating and being active when it comes to preventing chronic
diseases. Everyone deserves to have access to oral health care, but for many Canadians, it’s just too
expensive. That’s why we introduced this legislation today that would help uninsured families with
children under 12 get the dental care they need, and show off their brightest smiles, this year.”
-The Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, Canada’s Minister of Health
“With affordability on everyone’s mind, this additional support will ease more pressure on renters
across the country. In addition to federal programs to create affordable housing and provide rental
supports, this one-time payment is another way our government is ensuring vulnerable families are not
left behind. These are the kinds of measures our government is putting into action right now totackle
the housing crisis.”
-The Honourable Ahmed Hussen, Minister of Housing and Diversity and Inclusion
“During the pandemic, when Canadians needed support, the CRA rose to the occasion. It will do so again
by ensuring that eligible Canadians can apply for benefits in a simple and secure way. Our government
will ensure that Canadians can get the support and dental care they need.”
-The Honourable Diane Lebouthillier, Canada’s Minister of National Revenue
“The federal government is committed to supporting children and parents now, and for generations to
come. From dental care to increasing access to early learning and child care, we will continue to ensure
that every child has the best possible start in life, while making life more affordable for families in
Canada.”
-The Honourable Karina Gould, Minister of Families, Children and Social Development
Quick Facts
• These measures total more than $4.5 billion in targeted support for the Canadians who need it
most, of which $3.1 billion is in addition tofunding previously allocated in Budget 2022.
• The pieces of legislation introduced today are in addition to other measures that will support
Canadians this year,including:
o Enhancing the Canada Workers Benefit at a cost of $1.7 billion in new support for an estimated
three million low-income workers this year, with a couple receiving up to $2,400 more this year, and
single workers receiving up to $1,200 more. Most recipients first received this additional support
through their 2021 tax refund.
o Cutting regulated child care fees in half on average for families in Canada by the end of this year.
o A 10 per cent increase to the Old Age Security (OAS) pension for seniors 75 years and older,
which began in July 2022, and will provide more than $800in new support to full pensioners over the
first year, and increase benefits for more than three million seniors.
o Providing more support for students by doubling the Canada Student Grant amount until July
2023 and by waiving interest on Canada Student Loans through to March 2023.
• Examples of how the government is making life more affordable for Canadians this year:
o A couple in Ontario with an income of $45,000 and a child in daycare could receive about an
additional $7,800 above their existing benefits this fiscal year.
o A single recent graduate, living in Alberta, with an entry-level job and an income of $24,000
could receive an approximate additional $1,300 in new and enhanced benefits.
o A senior with a disability in Quebec could benefit from over $2,500 more this year than she
received last year.
• This is the first step, outlined in the Supply and Confidence Agreement, to develop a national
dental care program. The Government of Canada aims to have that program started for those under 18,
personswith disabilities, and seniors by the end of 2023, with thefull program completed by 2025.
• Canada has the lowest total government deficit in the G7 this year, and by far the lowest net
debt burden among these countries (32.1 per cent of GDP versus an average of 97.5 per cent ofGDP for
the group as a whole).
• The International Monetary Fund and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development predict that the Canadian economy will see the strongest growth in the G7 this year and
next.
Associated Links
• Backgrounder: Making Life More Affordable: Doubling the Goods and Services Tax Credit for Six
Months-Canada.ca
• Backgrounder: Making Dental Care More Affordable: The Canada Dental Benefit-Canada.ca
• Backgrounder: Making Housing More Affordable: One-time top-up to the Canada Housing
Benefit program-Canada.ca
• Making life more affordable for Canadians this year | Prime Minister of Canada (pm.gc.ca)
• Affordability Plan-Canada.ca
• Deputy Prime Minister outlines government’s Affordability Plan for Canadians -Canada.ca
• Budget 2022-A Plan to Grow Our Economy and Make Life More Affordable
Contacts
Media may contact:
Gabriel Felcarek
Press Secretary
Office of the Minister of Tourism and Associate Minister of Finance
gabriel.felcarek@ised-isde.gc.ca
Marie-France Proulx
Press Secretary
Office of the Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos
Minister of Health
613-957-0200
Arevig Afarian
Press Secretary
Office of the Minister of Housing and Diversity and Inclusion
arevig.afarian@infc.gc.ca
Chris MacMillan
Press Secretary
Office of the Minister of National Revenue
chris.macmillan@cra-arc.gc.ca
Media Relations
Department of Finance Canada
mediare@fin.gc.ca
613-369-4000
General enquiries
Phone: 1-833-712-2292
TTY: 613-369-3230
financepublic-financepublique@fin.gc.ca
Health Canada
613-957-2983
media@hc-sc.gc.ca Public Enquiries:
613-957-2991
1-866-225-0709
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation
media@cmhc.ca
Canada Revenue Agency
613-948-8366
cra-arc.media@cra-arc.gc.ca
Stay connected
Twitter: @financecanada
RSS
Backgrounder: Canada Dental Benefit
The proposed Canada Dental Benefit would provide eligible parents or guardians with adjusted family
net incomesunder $90,000 with direct, up-front, tax-free payments to help with dental expenses for
their children who are under 12 years old. The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) would process the
applications and payments for the Canada Dental Benefit.
This is the firststage of the Government’s plan to improve dental care for Canadians with adjusted
family net incomes under $90,000. The Canada Dental Benefit would allow eligible children under 12 to
start getting the dental care they need while the Government works to develop a comprehensive
national dental care program.
Eligibility
Families would be eligible for the Canada Dental Benefit if they:
• have a child under 12 years of age who does not have access to private dental care insurance
(employer-based or purchasedthrough the applicant or other family member);
• have an adjusted family net income under $90,000 per year;
• have filed their most recent income tax and benefit return (for the taxation year 2021, in order
to be eligible in 2022—for more information on how to file a return, visitCanada.ca/doing-your-taxes);
• are the parent (or legal guardian) who receives the Canada Child Benefit for that child;
• have incurred—or will incur—dental care expenses for the child which have not been—and will
not be—fully reimbursed under another federal, provincial or territorial government program; and
• have provided information on the recent or planned dental care visit that the benefit would be
used to pay for, along with information about the dental care provider.
Application
The Canada Dental Benefit would provide payments up to $650 per child under 12, per year, for families
who have an adjusted net income under $90,000 per year.
The total maximum benefit per child would be $1,300 (up to $650 per year, or less insituations where a
family’s adjusted net income is between $70,000 and $89,999).
Specifically:
• $650 would be provided for each eligible child, per year, if the family’s adjusted net income is
under $70,000.
• $390 would be provided for each eligible child, per year, if the family’s adjusted net income is
between $70,000 and $79,999.
• $260 would be provided for each eligible child, per year, if the family’s adjusted net income is
between $80,000 and $89,999.
Parents or guardians of eligible children would be able to apply for, and receive, the benefit up front,
before accessing dental care. Eligible Canadians would apply via CRA’s secure My Account or by calling
the CRA Contact Centre. Families should receive payment within five business days if they areregistered
for direct deposit, or 10-12 business days if they are receiving a cheque by mail.
Application periods
The first application period will be between December 1, 2022, and June 30, 2023. Families who meet
the eligibility criteria as of December1, 2022, can receive up to $650, depending on their income, for
each eligible child under 12, for dental care that is received between October 1, 2022, and June 30,
2023.
Jennie and Samantha are parents to 11-year-old Bernie who has a dentist’s appointmenton
November 15, 2022. Jennie and Samantha have a combined adjusted family net income of
$72,394.
Jennie and Samantha would be able to apply, retroactively, for the Canada Dental Benefit on
December 1, 2022, and obtain $390 so long as Bernie was still under 12 and Jennie and
Samantha continue to meet the other eligibility criteria as of December 1, 2022.
The second application period will be between July 1, 2023, and June 30, 2024. Families who meet the
eligibility criteria as of July 1, 2023, can, again,receive up to $650, depending on their income, for each
eligible child under 12, for dental care that is received between July 1, 2023, and June 30, 2024.
Families who had eligible dental care expenses that exceeded $650 during the first benefit period can
choose to apply for an additional benefit for those first benefit period expenses in year two, instead of
applying to have new expenses covered in that period. To do this, families still need to meet the
eligibility criteria for the first benefit period, but will not be able to apply for this additional benefit until
the second benefit period applications open on July 1, 2023. However, by choosing this option, families
will not be able to apply for a benefit payment to cover dental care expenses incurred during the second
benefit period, because they will have already received the maximum amount allowed under the
benefit.
Raman and Myra applied for the Canada Dental Benefit during the first benefit period and
received $650 for their son Emmett’s visit to the dentist, which cost $1210. Emmett was 11
years old.
Since then, Emmett has turned 12 and is no longer eligible under the Canada Dental Plan.
However, given that the cost of the first visit was more than $650, and Emmett was eligible and
the familyreceived a benefit payment in year one, the family would be able to apply during the
second benefit period to cover the additional expenses that were incurred during the first visit,
even though Emmett has since turned 12. This is because Emmett was eligible when the
expenses were incurred.
Families who were eligible for both the first and second benefit period but did not apply in the first year,
for whatever reason, will be able to apply to receive two payments at once during the second benefit
period ifthey have expenses that exceed $650. Note that this option is open only to those who did not
apply for, but could have received, a benefit payment during the first benefit period. If they have
expenses below $650, they would still only receive only payment.
Edgar and Amélie have two children: Kennedy is 8 and Elizabeth is 5. The family has a combined
adjusted net income of $61,223 and meet all eligibility criteria. In August 2023, Edgar and Annie
learned they could have been eligible during the first benefit period but didn’t realize it, even
though Kennedy and Elizabeth saw the dentist in February 2023. Each girl’s visit cost $803, for a
total of $1606.
When Edgar and Amélie apply for the benefit during the second benefit period (between July 1,
2023, and June 30, 2024), providing they all still meet all the other eligibility criteria, they can
apply for the Canada Dental Benefit for both the first and second benefit periods, meaning they
will receive $1300 per child (benefit coverage for both benefit periods), for a total of $2600.
Providing this flexibility responds to the differing dental care needs of the children of applicants, giving
them the flexibility to access the benefit when needed.
Once the program is live, Canadians will be able tocontact the CRA for more detailed information about
eligibility specific to their circumstances.
The Canada Dental Benefit would not reduce other federal income-tested benefits such as the Canada
Workers Benefit, the Canada Child Benefit, or the Goods andServices Tax Credit.
To get ready to apply for this new benefit, Canadians should sign up for CRA My Account and direct
deposit, make sure they are receiving the Canada Child Benefit, ensure their personal information with
the CRA is up to date, and file their 2021 income tax return.
Media Lines / Questions and Answers
Canada Dental Benefit
Context: On September 20, the Minister of Health announced that the Government has introduced
legislation toestablish the Canada Dental Benefit. This temporary benefit would be available for families
with children under 12 who have an adjusted family net income of less than $90,000, and who do not
have access to private insurance.
Key Messages:
• Havingaccess to quality dental care is an integral part of overall health. Seeing a dental care
professional is important for our health, but can be expensive. We know that a third of Canadians do not
have dental insurance and, as a result, many Canadians gowithout necessary dental care.
• The Government of Canada has introduced legislation in the House of Commons that includes
the implementation of the new, temporary Canada Dental Benefit.
• This is the first stage of the Government’s plan to improve dental care for Canadians in families
with an adjusted net income under $90,000. This would allow children under 12 who do not have access
to dental care insurance to get the dental care they need while the Government develops a
comprehensive, long-term national dental care program.
• The Canada Dental Benefit would allow parents to access direct payments totalling up to $1,300
per eligible child under 12 (up to $650 per year) to support the costs of dental care services.
• It is estimated that over 500,000 Canadian children would benefit from this targeted investment
of up to $938 million.
• The Canada Dental Benefit is a temporary benefit that if put in place would provide support to
families who need it most, and give children under 12 who have developing teeth and gums the
opportunity to get much-needed dental care.
• The Canada Dental Benefit would be accessed through the Canada Revenue Agency’s (CRA) My
Account. The CRA is leaning heavily on its experience and best practices in delivering essential benefits
to Canadians in order to administer the Canada Dental Benefit on behalf of the Government of Canada.
• The CRA is getting ready to deliver a seamless, secure and user-centric experience, to make it as
easy as possible for eligible Canadians to getthe money they need for dental care.
• Budget 2022, proposed funding of $5.3 billion over five years for dental care, starting in 2022
with children under 12 years, and $1.7 billion ongoing for a national dental care program for Canadians
who earn under $90,000.
Questions and Answers
Eligibility
Q1. Who would be able to receive the Canada Dental Benefit?
To be eligible, families would need to meet all of the following eligibility criteria:
- Have a child under 12 years of age who does not have access toprivate dental care coverage
(employer-based or purchased through the applicant or other family member);
- Have an adjusted family net income under $90,000 per year.
- Have filed their most recent income tax and benefit return (for the taxation year 2021, to be
eligible in 2022—for more information on how to file a return, visitCanada.ca/doing-your-taxes);
- Be the parent (or legal guardian) who receives the Canada Child Benefit for that child;
- Have incurred—or will incur—dental care expenses for the child which have not been fully
reimbursed under another federal, provincial or territorial government program; and
- Have provided information on the recent or planned dental care visit that the benefit would be
used to pay for, along with information about the dental care provider.
Q2. What is adjusted family net income, and how would someone know if their income is within range
or not?
Adjusted family net income is your family net income, including the net income of your spouse or
common-law partner if you have one, minus any universal child care benefit (UCCB) and registered
disability savings plan (RDSP) income received plus any UCCB and RDSP amounts repaid. A calculator on
Canada.ca/dentalis available to help Canadians determine eligibility and their adjusted family net
income.
Q3. Why is it only families that are able to access this benefit? Budget 2022 mentioned persons with
disabilities, seniors and children under 18—when will they get dental care coverage? What about single
Canadians? When will all Canadians be able to accessthe program?
The Canada Dental Benefit is a start and would allow eligible children under 12 years of age to access
dental care while their teeth and gums are still developing. This benefit is temporary and would be in
place while the Government of Canada takes the necessary steps to build a comprehensive, longer-term
national dental care program.
Q4. In the situation of shared custody arrangements, would both parents be eligible to apply for a
Canada Dental Benefit for their eligible children?
Parents with a shared custody arrangement on file for the Canada Child Benefit would each be treated
individually in the application system and, for compliance purposes, not as a unit.
That means each parent would need to apply for their share of the benefit individually in order to
receive it. If only one parent applies, that parent would receive their part of the funding. In the system,
the child’s name would be auto-populated in both parents’ accounts and can be chosen/clicked on until
that parent applies—if one parent applies it would show as completed in their account but that would
not affect the other parent’s account.
Similarly, each parent’s adjusted family net income would be assessed on an individual basis. If one
parent’s adjusted family net income is below the incomethreshold and the other is above it, only the
parent who is below can apply for their part of the benefit. One parent may also receive more if their
income is lower, or less if their income is closer to $90,000.
Compliance activities would be treated individually, as would any consequences. For example, if one
parent is ineligible to apply for the benefit in a future year, the other parent could still apply for their
part of the funding.
Q5. Would legal guardians be eligible to apply for the Canada Dental Benefit for children under 12 years
of age who are in their care?
Yes, legal guardians would be eligible to apply for the Canadian Dental benefit as long as they meet all
eligibility criteria.
Q6. What about children in care? Are they eligible?
Children in care would not be eligible for the Canada Dental Benefit. These children have access to
dental care through provincial/territorial programs.
Q7. What constitutes the definition of a child under 12? As of what date?
According to the proposed legislation, eligible children would need to be 11 years old or under as of
December 1, 2022, for the first year of the benefit, and as of July 1, 2023, for the second year of the
benefit.
Coverage
Q8. What types of dental care would be covered by the Canada Dental Benefit?
The Canada Dental Benefit could be used for any dental care provided by a regulated oral health
professional licensed to practise in the place where care is provided. The exact care covered by the
benefit would be decided between the patientand their oral health care provider.
Q9. How much money would eligible families receive?
The Canada Dental Benefit would provide payments up to $650 per child under 12, per year, for families
with adjusted net income under $90,000 per year.
• $650 wouldbe provided for each eligible child, per year, if the family’s adjusted net income is
under $70,000.
• $390 would be provided for each eligible child, per year, if the family’s adjusted net income is
between $70,000 and $79,999.
• $260 would be provided for each eligible child, per year, if the family’s adjusted net income is
between $80,000 and $89,999.
Q10. Would the Canada Dental Benefit be taxable?
No, the Canada Dental Benefit is tax-free.
Q11. If I’m eligible for this benefit, and thedental cost is less than the amount allocated, do I keep the
money or do I need to return the rest?
No, applicants would not be required to return any unused portions of the Canada Dental Benefit.
Q12. Why are families able to keep the extra money even if the dental cost was less than the amount
allocated?
The amount of the Canada Dental Benefit is based on average, basic oral health care costs in Canada,
including an initial exam, set of x-rays, and basic preventative care and/or a small amount of restorative
work, like a filling. It is not expected that the benefit would exceed the cost of that care in most cases.
Parents with any funding left over could look to further supplement their child’s oral health in other
ways, for instance with high quality toothbrushes, fluoride toothpaste and floss, if they wished.
Q13. How much would this benefit cost Canadians?
The targeted investment for this benefit is up to $938 million. It is estimated that over 500,000 Canadian
children would benefit from this investment.
Q: $938M has been earmarked for the Canada Dental Benefit, however if you divide that by the 500,000
children you estimate are eligible, that only comes to $650M over the two years. Can you explain the
math?
$938M has been set aside for work on thedental care commitment. This includes funding for both
benefit payments to eligible parents with children under 12, but also the administrative costs of running
the program and doing policy work related to the development of a long-term program. While we have
estimated the number of children who will benefit at 500K, it is an estimate and the funding set aside
for the benefit includes a buffer in case the actual number of eligible parents applying is higher.
Q14. Would receiving the Canada Dental Benefit reduce any other federal income-tested benefits such
as the Canada Workers Benefit, the Canada Child Benefit, or the GST Credit?
No, the Canada Dental Benefit would not reduce other federal benefits.
Q15. Would applicants covered by provincial or territorial programs be eligible?
Yes. We know that provincial and territorial programs do not all cover dental care needs for children
under 12 equally and that, in some cases, the programs focus only on emergency needs. Children under
12 who are also covered by provincial or territorial programs would still be eligible for the Canada
Dental Benefit if they and their family meet all of the criteria to qualify for the benefit. However families
whose needs are met by their provincial and territorial programs and don’t have out-of-pocket costs
won’t be eligible for the benefit and shouldn’t apply.
Q16. Would applicants covered by the Non-Insured Health Benefits program be eligible?
Yes. Children under 12 covered by Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) would continue tobe covered by
the robust dental coverage available to them under that program. Parents covered by NIHB would be
eligible to apply for their children under 12 if they meet all of the other criteria for the benefit. However,
we anticipate in most cases, NIHBwould meet their needs and they would not have out-of-pocket
expenses for their dental care. Applicants must have out-of-pocket expenses not fully reimbursed by
other government programs in order to be eligible for the Canada Dental Benefit.
Q17. Would applicants covered by any benefit programs for veterans be eligible?
Yes. Veterans covered by any federal health benefit programs would be eligible for the Canada Dental
Benefit, as long as they meet all of the other criteria for the benefit and have out of pocket expenses for
their children’s dental care.
Application process
Q18. When can families begin to apply for this benefit? Would applicants be able to apply for previous
periods retroactively?
The target implementation date for the Canada Dental Benefit is December 1, 2022, pending
Parliamentary approval and Royal Assentof enabling legislation, and the benefit could cover expenses
retroactive to October 1, 2022, for qualifying children and families who were eligible as of the December
1, 2022, eligibility date.
Q19. What if I do not have access to the Internet? How would I be able to apply?
Eligible families who are unable to access the Internet would also be able to apply for the Canada Dental
Benefit through CRA’s client contact centre.
Q20. How would families or individuals who do not file income taxes, or do not receive the Canada Child
Benefit, or cannot provide an address for their dentist (as is the case for many vulnerable populations),
receive the Canada Dental Benefit?
In order to receive the new proposed Canada Dental Benefit, applicants would need to make sure they
have filed their 2021 tax return. Filing taxes is easy with the Community Volunteer Income Tax Program
(if eligible) or through NETFILE-certified software. They can also file online through the services of an
electronic filer certified to use our EFILE service.
If applicants are unable to apply for these new programs online, they could call the CRA to get their
application started. Before calling, applicants should check the approximate wait times on Canada.ca
and to validate their identity, make sure they have their SIN, address, date of birth, and a copy of their
most recently assessed tax return.
Q21. How oftenwould applicants need to apply?
Applicants would need to apply for the Canada Dental Benefit for each of the benefit periods.
Q22. How would the first and second benefit application period work? Would there be flexibility?
The first application period would be between December 1, 2022, and June 30, 2023. Families who meet
eligibility criteria on December 1, 2022, can receive up to $650 (see Q9), depending on their income, for
each eligible child under 12 for dental care that is received or would be received between October 1,
2022, and June 30, 2023.
The second application period would be between July 1, 2023, and June 30, 2024. Families who meet
eligibility criteria on July 1, 2023, can, again, receive up to $650, depending on their income, for each
eligible child under 12 for dental care that is received or would be received between July 1, 2023, and
June 30, 2024.
Families who had eligible dental care expenses that exceeded $650 during the first benefit period could
apply for an additional benefit during year two, to help cover those extra costs. To do this, families
would still need to meet the eligibility criteria for the first benefit period, but would not be able to apply
for this additional benefit until the second benefit period applications opened on July 1, 2023.
However, by choosing this option, families would not be able to apply for a benefit payment to cover
dental care expenses incurred during the second benefit period, because they would have already
received the maximum amount allowed under the benefit.
Families who were eligible during both the first and second benefit period but did not apply in the first
year, for whatever reason, could apply to receive two payments at once during the second benefit
period if they have expenses that exceed $650. However, this option is only open to those who did not
apply for, but could have received, a benefit payment during the first benefit period. If they have
expenses below $650 they would still only
Q23. Would applicants be able to request an advance for future payments if dental costs exceed the
allotted amount?
While there are some flexibilities in place, no one applicant may receive more than two benefit
payments over the benefit periods, and the total amount received from this benefit would not exceed
$1,300.
Q24. Who would be responsible for processing the payments and how quickly can applicants expect to
receive the money?
CRA’s My Account would be a quick, easy and secure way to apply. In order to receive this benefit,
parents must also be in receipt of the Canada Child Benefit. As a result, many applicants may already be
familiar with My Account. Most applicants can expect to receive their payments within 3-5 business days
if they are enrolled for direct deposit, and within 10-12 business days if they are receiving a cheque by
mail.
Q25. How would applicants’ eligibility be verified?
The CRA would use its existing tools to ensure compliance and verify applicant eligibility, including
income and the presence and age of children. Applicants would be asked to save their dental care
receipts for a period of six years, to show the benefit was spent on dental care as intended in case
verification is required.
To determine eligibility, the CRA would proceed with an up-front verification of the applicant's income,
child's age, family relationship and that they are in receipt of the Canada ChildBenefit for that child.
Additionally, parents or guardians of eligible children would need to attest that:
• the child does not have access to private dental care coverage;
• the parent or guardian of the eligible child had or would have out of pocket dental care
expenses for which they would use the benefit; and
• the parent or guardian understands they would need to demonstrate how those out of pocket
expenses occurred (e.g., show receipts), if required.
Q26. Would the CRA be contacting my employer or dentist’s office to verify eligibility?
The CRA would take steps to implement additional verification and security measures up-front, to help
ensure benefit payments are delivered only to individuals who are entitled to receive them.
In some cases, the CRA could request additional information or contact an applicant’s employer or
dentist’s office to validate eligibility.
Q27. How are you protecting against fraud, and would people who misuse the system deliberately, or
accidentally, berequired to repay the benefit?
The CRA continues to enhance the security of its digital services to protect Canadians from fraudulent
activity. Security features include multi-factor authentication and making email addresses mandatory for
those who use CRA My Account.
The CRA would lean heavily on a range of existing tools from administering other government
programs—as set out in the draft legislation—to conduct compliance, verification and collections
activities.
Q28. How can applicants get ready to apply for the Canada Dental Benefit?
If the legislation passes and receives Royal Assent, to make sure they’re ready to apply for the Canada
Dental Benefit when applications launch later in 2022, Canadians should sign up for CRA My Account
and direct deposit, ensure they have applied for or currently receive the Canada child benefit, file their
2021 income tax return if they have not already done so, and update their address and banking
information if it has changed.
Q29. What should applicants do if they’re locked out of CRA My Account?
Individuals may become locked out of their accounts for a variety of reasons, such as incorrectly
entering their password or multi-factor authentication passcode too many times, or as a precautionary
security measure if suspicious activity is detected. Individuals who become locked out of their online
account can contact the CRA at 1-800-959-8281to regain access.
Engagement activities
Q30. Who has the government met with to inform the design of the Canada Dental Benefit, and the
longer-term national dental care program?
Discussions with key stakeholders, including industry, are ongoing to help inform the Government’s
decisions on implementing a long-term, comprehensive national dental care program. Insights gained
from those discussions also informed the design of the Canada Dental Benefit.
Health care strain and HHR
Q31. Given the current health care system crisis, is this the right time to be spending money on a
national dental care program? Wouldn’t the money be better spent increasing the Canada Health
Transfer to provinces?
Canadians deserve a health care system that delivers results. The Government of Canada is committed
to protecting and strengthening Canada’s publicly funded health care system. The Government of
Canada has taken an active role in working with provincial and territorial governments and key health
system stakeholders, to identify both immediate and longer-term solutions to address significant health
human resources challenges, such as access to health care services in rural and remote communities.
Earlier this year, the Government provided an additional $2 billion one-time top-up to provinces and
territories, distributed equally per capita. This amount—in addition to the $4.5 billion Canada Health
Transfertop-up provided since the start of the pandemic—will further help provinces and territories to
address immediate pandemic-related health care system pressures, as well as address longstanding
health workforce challenges.
The Government is also working toincrease the number of doctors andnurses in communities that need
them most and by helping internationally trained health care professionals gettheir credentials
recognized andfind work in the health care system.
Budget 2022 provided $26.2 million in funding to increase the forgivable amount of student loans for
doctors, nurses and other eligible practitioners who practise in rural and remote communities. In
addition, the current list of professionals eligible to the program will be expanded. Budget 2022 also
provided $115 million over five years, with $30 million ongoing, to expand the Foreign Credential
Recognition Program and help up to 11,000 internationally trained health care professionals per year get
their credentials recognized and find work intheir field. It will support initiatives aimed at reducing
barriers to foreign credential recognition for health care professionals. Budget 2022 notes that the
Government of Canada will provide continued leadership on reducing barriers to internal trade and
labour mobility, such as in the health sector.
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health care
services, the responsibility for the management of health workforces falls within provincial and
territorial jurisdictions. They, along with other key stakeholders, will be indispensable in addressing
pressing health workforce challenges.
Dental and oral health care is an important part of overall health, and supporting the development of a
national dental care program is part of the government’s commitment to improving and strengthening
Canada’s publicly funded health care system.
Q32. Are there sufficient providers across the country to provide dental care at the scale of this
program? For example, how would families in northern or remote communities access dental care so
they can take advantageof this Canada Dental Benefit?
The Canada Dental Benefit would address a priority need—children’s oral health—for a short period of
time, but it is just a start. The Government of Canada is taking steps to build a long-term, comprehensive
national dental care program.
The long-term national dental care program
Q33. How much money is being invested todevelop the long-term program?
Budget 2022 committed $5.3 billion over five years, and $1.7 billion ongoing, to help with dental care for
Canadians who are unable to access care because of the costs.
Q34. What does it mean that the Canada DentalBenefit is a temporary program?
The Canada Dental Benefit is a proposed interim measure that would allow Canadian families to begin to
access funding as soon as possible to begin dealing with some of their eligible children’s dental care
needs.
While this temporary program is in place, the Government of Canada is working tobuild a
comprehensive, longer-term national dental care program.
Q35. When would thelong-term program be in place?
The federal government remains committed to providing dental care to Canadians, and continues to
take needed steps to build a comprehensive national long-term dental care program. The federal
government remains committed to full implementation of a dental care program for families with
adjusted net incomes under $90,000 by 2025.
Q36. How would the long-term program work? Would it be managedby a third party provider, by CRA
and HC (as the temporary one is) or by provinces and territories?
Discussions with key partners are helping to inform the Government’s decisions on implementing the
long-term Canadian dental care program.
More details will be available as decisions are finalized.
Bill C-31
Q&As for the Minister of Health’s Appearance at the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance
November 2, 2022
Qs 1-19 are a subset of Qs previously provided for HESA, but updated where needed given experience
with the Bill to date.
New Qs begin at Q20.
Q1–What is the purpose of Bill C-31?
The purpose of the Bill is to establish general provisions for the administration of the interim Canada
Dental Benefit through the new Dental Benefit Act and to also make related amendments to the Income
Tax Act, Excise Tax Act, and Excise Act, 2001 needed to administer the benefit for eligible applicants.
Q2–Why is this Bill needed?
The authorities provided in this draft legislation would allow the Minister of Health to address the
current and pressing needs of Canadians who cannot access dental care due to cost, starting with our
youngest Canadians–children under 12–tomitigate the negative long-term consequences of
inadequate oral health care while a longer-term program is being developed. This is a first step toward
the Government of Canada’s commitment to improve access to dental care for Canadians.
Q3-How will the Canada Dental Benefit work?
The Dental Benefit Act would give the Minister of Health authority to implement an application-based
payment, referred to as the interim Canada Dental Benefit. The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) will act
as the delivery agent for the Canada Dental Benefit.
The interim Canada Dental Benefit will be available for eligible children under 12 years old who do not
have access to private dental coverage.
Depending on the passage of the bill, it is intended that starting in late 2022, applicants will be able to
apply for, and receive, the benefit to pay for dental care services. Eligible Canadians will apply via CRA’s
secure My Account portal or by calling the CRA’s client contact centre.
Q4-Who will be responsible for processing the payments and how quickly can applicants expect to
receive the money?
The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) will act as the delivery agent for the interim Canada Dental Benefit,
predominantly through its secure My Account portal. Applications will be processed quickly
(automatically in many cases) with payments received within a week for individuals requesting direct
deposit and slightly longer (depending on mailing time) for those receiving payment by cheque.
Q5-How will applicants’ eligibility be verified?
Applicants’ income eligibility, presence of children and their age, and their receipt of the Canada Child
Benefit, will be verified through CRA’s existing information systems, including their previous year’s
income tax returns. Applicants will need to be ableto demonstrate that they had out of pocket costs
they used the benefit to pay for as intended (for example, by showing their receipts), in case CRA
requests that proof for verification purposes.
Q6-How are you protecting against fraud, and will people who misuse the system deliberately be
required to repay the benefit?
The CRA continues to enhance the security of its digital services to protect Canadians from fraudulent
activity. These include using security features such as multi-factor authentication and making email
addresses mandatory for those who use CRA’s My Account.
In cases of deliberate and serious misuse, like for other government programs run by the CRA, CRA will
have a range of tools at its disposal–as set out in the draft legislation–to maintain the integrity of the
program. The Dental Benefit Act defines violations and criminal offenses in relation to benefits provided
for under the Act, such as using false identity information, as well as punishments, including fines and
possible imprisonment.
Q7-Who will be able to receive the interim Canada Dental Benefit?
Under the proposed legislation, starting in 2022, families with children under 12 that have an adjusted
family net income of less than $90,000 in 2021, will be able to apply for the interim Canada Dental
Benefit of up to $650 for each eligible child. To be eligible, the child must not have access to private
dental care insurance or have their out-of-pocket dental care expenses fully reimbursed through a
different governmentprogram.
Q8-How do the options set out in section 7 of the Bill work? There seems to be new options available
to some but not all applicants.
Beginning on July 1, 2023, eligible Canadians will be able to apply for a second benefit payment of up to
another $650 to cover their eligible dental care expenses in the second year (for example, follow up
visits for their eligible children).
In cases where eligible Canadians have already received a benefit, but their expenses in the first year
exceeded $650,they could have the option to apply for their second benefit payment and use it toward
their first year expenses.
Similarly, if they were eligible but did not apply for the benefit in year one but face expenses above $650
in year two, they could be eligible to receive both payments at once to cover those excess costs.
However, in all cases, no more than $1300 can be received for any one child over the two-year period of
the Canada Dental Benefit.
Q9–How many people will be eligible to receive the interim Canada Dental Benefit?
Health Canada officials estimate that more than 500,000 children under 12 will be able to access needed
dental care services as a result of receiving the benefit in each of the benefit years.
Q10–How was the benefit level calculated?
Health Canada officials, in collaboration with the Chief Dental Officer of Canada, examined average costs
of dental care for a range of basic care needed by children, including exams, x-rays, fillings, and
preventative care like fluoride and sealants. These amounts were also compared to average costs for
some services in employer insurance plans, publicly available dental fee schedules, and the federal Non-
Insured Health Benefits program.
It is anticipated that the interim Canada Dental Benefit willenable applicants to pay for a basic level of
care for their children.
Q11-What will applicants need to know or do in order to apply for the interim Canada Dental Benefit?
Applicants will need to ensure the following:
• They have children under 12 yearsof age and are in receipt of the Canada Child Benefit for
those children.
• They can attest that the child does not have access to private insurance that covers dental care.
• They have filed their most recent income tax and benefit return (e.g. for the taxation year 2021,
in order to be eligible in 2022).
• They will be able to demonstrate–if asked, for example, with receipts–that they had out of
pocket dental care expenses for the child, the costs of which were not or will not be fully reimbursed,
for which they used the benefit.
• They will be able to provide information on their child’s planned or recent visit to a dental
professional and about their/their spouse’s employer, if they have one.
Eligible applicants will be encouraged to register forCRA’s My Account and direct deposit in order to
make processing and issuing payments for the benefit easier and faster.
Q12-Will applicants with dental coverage provided through provincial or territorial programs be
eligible?
Yes. Applicantscovered by provincial or territorial programs will be eligible for the interim Canada
Dental Benefit if they meet all of the criteria to qualify for the benefit. However, people whose dental
care needs are met by those provincial and territorial programs and who, as a result, do not have out of
pocket costs that are not fully reimbursed, won’t be eligible for the benefit and shouldn’t apply.
Q13-Will applicants covered by Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB)
program benefits beeligible?
Yes. However, the interim Canada Dental Benefit is not meant to replace the NIHB program. NIHB
recipients will continue to have access to the robust dental coverage available to them under that
program. NIHB recipients will be eligible to applyfor the benefit if they meet all of the other criteria. In
most cases, the NIHB program will meet their needs and NIHB recipients will not have unreimbursed out
of pocket expenses, which would make them ineligible for the benefit.
Note, if pressed: travelexpenses (which could be an expense an NIHB recipient may incur) are not
eligible under the benefit. The bill sets out that the benefit is to be used for services provided by
regulated oral health care professionals only.
Q14-Who has the government metwith to inform the design of the interim Canada Dental Benefit, and
the longer-term national dental care program?
Discussions with experts, including clinicians and key stakeholders, as well as industry, are ongoing to
help inform the Government’s decisions on implementing a long-term Canadian national dental care
program. Insights gained from those discussions also informed the design of the interim Canada Dental
Benefit.
Q15-What does it mean that the Canada Dental Benefit is a temporary program?
TheCanada Dental Benefit is an interim measure that will allow families with children under 12 to
access funding as soon as possible to begin dealing with some of their dental care needs.
While this temporary program is in place, the Government of Canada is working as fast as it can to build
a comprehensive, longer-term national dental care program.
Q16-When will the long-term program be in place?
Budget 2022 committed to provide dental care starting in 2022 with families with children under 12. The
interimCanada Dental Benefit is an important step in this direction. More will be communicated on the
long-term program and its launch date as soon as more is known.
Q17-How will the long-term program work? Will it be managed by a third party provider, by CRA and
HC (as the temporary one is) or by provinces and territories?
The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces and territories, key stakeholders,
industry partners, academics and dentistry associations and organizations to help inform decisions on
implementing the long-term Canadian dental care program. More details will be available as decisions
are finalized regarding the long-term dental care program.
Q18-How much will the Canada Dental Benefit cost?
Health Canada has estimated that the interim Canada Dental Benefit will cost $938 million over the two
benefit periods.
Q19-Why is royal assent of the legislation needed so quickly?
The proposed legislation must receive Royal Assent very soon in order to provide the time for Health
Canada and the Canada Revenue Agency to make the necessary preparations to reach a target
implementation date of December 1, 2022.
*New Qs and As:
Q20–Does the proposed legislation step into provincial/territorial jurisdiction over health care?
Theproposed legislation does not step into provincial/territorial jurisdiction. The Government of Canada
is able to use its spending power as long as it does not use that power in a way that amounts to
substantive regulation of a space that is under Provincial/Territorial jurisdiction.
In total, the provinces and territories spend an estimated $650 million a year on public dental programs
and only some of that goes to children. The benefit would provide additional support to children who
may not be covered or fully covered under available provincial/territorial programs.
Q21-Why do Health Canada cost estimates differ from cost estimates from the Parliamentary Budget
Officer (PBO)?
Health Canada officials have met with the PBO’s office to discuss its costingand have determined that
the variances are primarily due to some minor differences in assumptions (e.g., Health Canada did not
forecast savings from reduced Medical Expense Tax credits, as the PBO did) and to the treatment of
administrative costs.
In thecase of administrative costs, PBO assumes costs similar to that of the well-established Non-
insured Health Benefits program. Health Canada cost estimates include start up and close-out costs for
the interim benefit, as well as policy development, program oversight and compliance efforts, additional
resources for the Canada Revenue Agency contact centres who will help applicants and answer
questions, and outreach and communication costs. These investments take into account the need to
raise awareness of thisbenefit among eligible parents and to maintain the integrity of the program,
given it relies on an attestation model for some information.
Q22-Will the provinces and territories receive funding to deliver the Canada Dental Benefit?
The proposed delivery model for the interim Canada Dental Benefit does not include funding to the
provinces or territories–rather the Canada Revenue Agency will make payments directly to eligible
Canadians.
Q23-Will there be any differences on how the benefit works across the country?
The application process, eligibility criteria, and level of payment will be the same across the country.
Q24-We’ve heard there is no information available about the long-term program yet. In that case, what
is the purpose of the recently launched “Intent to Qualify”?
An Invitation to Qualify (ITQ) was released on October 28, welcoming interested third party benefits
administrators to provide Health Canada with a clearer picture of how a national dental care program
could be operationalized in line with the Budget 2022 commitments.
Health Canada will carefully review information provided through this process to help inform its best
advice to the Government on a path forward.
Q25-What if someone receives the Canada Dental Benefit withthe intention of seeking dental care for
their child but the date of their visit changes, or for whatever reason, does not end up receiving services
from a dental professional?
So long as the care is received within the eligible benefit period, the applicant will not be required to
adjust the date of their planned visit with CRA. The important thing is we want children to get the care
they need.
However, if an applicant receives a payment for dental services that they intended to seek, but could or
did notend up receiving any services at all, CRA has processes in place to allow for the repayment of the
benefit.
Q26-Why will some provinces or territories–those who offer less robust dental care coverage–
receive more money than others?
The interim Canada Dental Benefit is being issued directly to families who need it –and not to provinces
or territories. There is no provincial or territorial “share” in that sense.
The Bill is intended to close gaps so that children who need the most help accessing dental care,
regardless of where they live, can have an equal chance at good oral health.
Q27-Quebec has a universal program. So are you saying Quebec families’ money will be used to pay for
a program they can’t benefit from?
Provincial andterritorial programs for children vary widely in terms of who and what is covered. For
example, in Quebec where a universal program exists for children under 10, important preventative
services are not covered (and older children are not covered at all).
In those cases, families living in those jurisdictions with out-of-pocket expenses over and above what
those programs cover will still be eligible to apply for the Canada Dental Benefit.
Q28-Is there enough capacity in the oral health human resources sector to absorb the volume of new
patients who may use this benefit to seek care they would not otherwise get?
There are an estimated 90,000 oral health professionals practicing in Canada, including approximately
25,000 dentists, 30,000 dental hygienists, and 30,000 dental assistants.
We believe that there are sufficient dental professionals to meet the additional demand from children
who will be able to care get because of this interim benefit.
We are aware there are some concerns about access to professionals–in rural and remote regions in
particular–when it comes to the long-term program for all ages. We will continue to work with
stakeholders and experts on strategies to support oral health human resources.
Q29-What plans are in place to collectnational data on oral health?
Data on oral health in Canada is sparse at this time. The good news is that Statistics Canada is currently
in the field collecting data not previously been collected since 2009. This will provide important, baseline
data for our new investments in oral health.
In addition, Health Canada is working with oral health experts and researchers to identify additional
data and research needs in support of the long-term program.
Q30-Will this benefit be sufficient to pay for children’s needs?
We anticipate that this interim benefit should provide most families with the means to address their
child’s basic oral health needs until a comprehensive long-term program is in place.
But we know some children will have needs that are more complex. In those cases, if a family were to
incur more than $650 of dental expenses in one year for a child, they may qualify to apply the benefit
payment from the second benefit year toward the remainder of the first year’s expenses, or to get both
paymentsat once in year two.
Q31-What if employers cancel insurance for their employees, assuming that the Benefit will cover their
needs?
This is an interim benefit, which will be offered for two benefit years, and for which only children under
12 are eligible.
Because of the short time frame and limited scope of the benefit, we anticipate that employers will
appreciate that the interim Canada Dental Benefit should not replace comprehensive coverage offered
to their employees.
A robust public communicationsand outreach strategy will accompany the launch of the interim benefit,
in an effort to ensure that all Canadians understand its eligibility requirements and intended impacts.
Q32–If recipients of public programs can top up their benefits with this program, why can’t those with
private insurance? Doesn’t this discourage employers from providing benefits and work against the
efforts of unions?
Canadians without insurance are nearly three times more likely than those with insurance to avoid
seeking dentalcare due to cost.
The interim Canada Dental Benefit is a targeted investment intended to provide immediate support,
over a limited period to time, to eligible families that need it most–those without access to any dental
coverage.
This is consistent with provincial and territorial dental programs, most of which are similarly aimed at
closing gaps for those who do not have access to dental coverage. Those programs have operated in
parallel to private insurance plans for many years.
SCENARIO NOTE
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING SENATE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL FINANCE (NFFN) –STUDY OF
THE SUBJECT MATTER OF BILL C-31, AN ACT RESPECTING COST OF LIVING RELIEF MEASURES RELATED
TO DENTAL CARE AND RENTAL HOUSING
November 2, 2022
MEETING SCENARIO
• At this meeting you will be joining Minister Hussen and Minister Lebouthillier in leading the Bill,
accompanied by the following officials:
o Dr. Stephen Lucas, Deputy Minister, Health Canada
o Ms. Lynne Tomson, Associate Assistant Deputy Minister,Health Canada
o Ms. Nadine Leblanc, Senior Vice President, Policy, CMHC
o Ms. Patricia Roset-Zuppa, Vice President, Policy Development, CMHC
o Ms. Gillian Pranke, Assistant Commissioner, Assessment, Benefit and Service Branch, CRA.
• The Committee meeting will begin with your opening remarks which you will have 5 minutes to
deliver. You will then take questions from Senators for the remainder of the time.
o There is no defined order in which Senators from the different parliamentary groups ask their
questions.
o Senators are generally recognized by the Chair in the order in which they indicate their desire to
ask a question. They are given five minutes untilthe list is exhausted.
o Further questions are allowed as time permits, with the length of questions assigned varying at
the call of the Chair. Second and further rounds of questioners are typically given three minutes.
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
• This will bethe 41st time that NFFN has met since the beginning of the 1st session of the 44th
Parliament. They have recently held hearings regarding the Main Estimates for the fiscal year ending
March 31, 2023.
• The Senate organizes itself differently from the Houseof Commons. While the House is defined
by political parties connected to the electoral process, the Senate consists of a variety of Parliamentary
Groups, consisting of Senators who collaborate on shared interests. An exception to this is the small
group of Senators who remain from the Conservative Party’s Senate caucus. The Conservative Senators
affiliate themselves with the political party and organize themselves as the Senate’s Official Opposition,
mirroring the role that Conservative MPs perform in theHouse of Commons.
• Current Senate Parliamentary Groups consist of the Independent Senators Group (ISG), the
Progressive Senate Group (PSG), the Canadian Senators Group (CSG), and the Conservative Party Senate
caucus (CPC).
• The ISG is formed primarily ofSenators appointed by Prime Minister Trudeau and principally
serves as an organizing vehicle for their work in the Senate. The PSG formed when the Liberal Party
caucus in the Senate lost recognition due to decreasing membership. It has added members since and
organizes itself as a force for progressive issues in the chamber. The CSG is formed of Senators who have
come together to promotea regional focus in their work.
• Conservative Senators are expected to oppose the legislation. The CPC’s most consistent
presence on the committee, other than the Chair, is that of Senator Elizabeth Marshall. During the
October 25 meeting of the Committee, she expressed concerns about the costing for the benefit and the
verification mechanisms for identifying fraud among applicants.
• Senators from other parliamentary groups also expressed concerns. At the October 25 meeting,
Senator Jean-Guy Dagenais (CSG) suggested that the Bill could have a negative effect on insurance,
implying that the provision of the Canada Dental Benefit would cause insurers to reduce coverage.
Senator Tony Loffreda (ISG) noted that the expected uptake in dental services might strain the existing
capacity in the dental care system. Senator Kim Pate (ISG) expressed concerns that the Canada Dental
Benefit might result in unintended claw backs for low-income families accessing means-tested programs
tied to fixed income percentages. These concerns continued to be raised at the October 26 meeting held
with stakeholders including the Canadian Dental Association.
• Other Senators were supportive, but noted the possibility of additional issues arising. At the
October 25 meeting, Senator Ratna Omidvar (ISG) asked a number of questions about harmonizing the
Canada Dental Benefit with existing municipal and provincial programs. Senator Margaret Dawn
Anderson (PSG) also had questions regarding the intersection of the benefit with the already-existing
Non Insured Health Benefits program. At the October 26 meeting, Senator Pat Duncan (ISG) raised
several questions suggesting the Government might work on improving NIHB.
• The Portfolio has prepared a range of briefing products, addressing a variety of concerns
including provincial-territorial jurisdiction, the impact on dental human resources, delivery mechanisms,
theconcerns of indigenous groups, preventing fraud, fiscal implications, public education regarding the
benefit and the need for expedited Royal Assent.
NEXT STEPS
• The Committee is expected to proceed with clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill at a later
date.
• Officials from Health Canada, the Canada Revenue Agency and the Canada Mortgage and
Housing Corporation will be available to appear before the Committee as part of clause-by-clause
consideration of the Bill.
