Created: 2020-07-29T13:01:34.697555
Name: For_an_appearance_before_the_House_of_Commons_Standing_Committee_on_Health__March_31,_2020
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/dee98289-986e-4373-8c35-79e51de6358a/resource/078a56ef-8281-47fa-b468-378bd80c05f6/download/cusersjdavitskdesktophesa-march-31st-english.pdf
Package ID: dee98289-986e-4373-8c35-79e51de6358a
Keywords: ['Health Canada', 'Coronavirus', 'Covid-19', 'Deputy Minister', 'Briefing', 'HESA']
Notes: Briefing Binder used by the Deputy Minister of Health at an appearance before the Standing Committee on Health on March 31, 2020
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
APPEARANCE OF THE DEPUTY MINISTER
HESA
Coronavirus
March 31, 2020
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Opening Remarks
2. Regulatory Review of Drugs and Devices
3. Drug Shortages
4. Digital Tools and Apps
5. Occupational Health and Safety
6. FPT Engagement
7. Personal Protective Equipment
8. HESA Coronavirus Document Request
Opening Remarks for
Dr. Stephen Lucas
Deputy Minister of Health Canada
For an appearance before
the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Health
COVID-19
March 31, 2020
Ottawa, ON
Allotted speaking time: 10 minutes
Speech length: 1103 words
Check against delivery
1
Introduction
Mr. Chair, thank you for the opportunity to speak to the
Committee today about Health Canada’s role in the
Government’s response to COVID-19.
The COVID-19 pandemic is unlike anything we have seen
in recent history. I can assure you that Health Canada is
taking all measures we can to protect the health and
safety of Canadians
Regulatory reviews of drugs and devices
Health Canada plays a vital role in the Government’s
COVID-19 response as the regulator of health products.
Core to our regulatory mandate is the review of health
products for safety, quality and efficacy. During this
critical period, it is very important to get drugs and medical
supplies quickly to the frontlines.
We are focused on expediting the review and approval of
drugs and devices to address COVID-19, while continuing
to ensure that these products are safe and effective for
Canadians.
We are using all tools in our toolkit.
Just last week, the Government welcomed the passage of
amendments to the Food and Drugs Act and the Patent
2
Act to streamline processes and provide the Government
with additional powers to:
 help prevent and mitigate shortages of drugs and
medical devices;
 seek additional information from companies to confirm
that products are safe for Canadians; and
 make, use, or sell a patented invention, such as a
medication or a ventilator, that is needed to respond
to this pandemic.
These amendments help position us to adapt quickly. Our
goal is to ensure that Canada is prepared for whatever
challenges come our way.
Interim orders
Another critical regulatory tool we have in our toolkit is the
use of interim orders.
An Interim Order is one of the fastest mechanisms
available to the Government of Canada to help make
health products available to help address larger-scale,
public health emergency situations — such as the COVID-
19 pandemic.
Earlier this month, the Minister of Health approved an
Interim Order to allow quicker and more flexible approval
of the importation and sale of medical devices necessary
for Canada’s response to COVID-19.
3
This Order made two new diagnostic tests immediately
available to Canadian laboratories, and we continue to
approve additional tests.
Drug Shortages
Despite all of these efforts, we anticipate there will be
shortages of health products given global demand.
Health Canada is working proactively to identify and
mitigate the impact of drug and medical device shortages
on Canadians and health care professionals during the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
We have stepped up our surveillance efforts and as I have
mentioned, we have adopted new, more agile processes,
to help ensure Canadians have access to the drugs and
medical devices they need.
We have increased the frequency of our engagement with
industry, provinces and territories, healthcare and patient
groups and international partners. These efforts are
leading to earlier signal identification and coordination of
mitigation efforts.
Personal Protective Equipment
As President Namiesniowski mentioned, we are also using
all the tools at our disposal to expedite supply of safe and
effective personal protective equipment, or PPE.
4
Protecting our front-line workers — those who care for the
sick and keep our communities running — is one of our
top priorities. Healthcare workers need a reliable supply
of appropriate PPE to do their jobs safely.
We are expediting approvals of licence applications
related to PPE products, sanitizers and disinfectants and
facilitating expedited access through interim measures.
This work is critical to ensure that Canada is able to
benefit from the latest advancements in research and
development related to COVID-19 – both domestically and
abroad.
Collaboration with PTs and other stakeholders
As we know, no jurisdiction is immune to the threat and
impact of COVID-19 and no individual government can
respond alone. Collaboration and cooperation are critical
to our response in Canada.
From the beginning, we have increased the frequency of
our engagement with provinces and territories, health care
professionals, patient groups and industry stakeholders.
The Minister of Health and I speak regularly with our
counterparts at the provincial and territorial level to ensure
that we are working together to meet the needs of the
health care system during this very unique and
challenging time.
5
In addition to regular contact with my provincial and
territorial counterparts, there is also now a dedicated sub-
committee of the Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health
working together to understand where potential pressure
points will be in the health care system and to mobilize
resources as needed.
We know that data and modelling are required elements to
understand the progression of the COVID-19 pandemic in
Canada.
You may be aware that data has been made public
through daily epidemiological reports on the COVID.ca site
and yesterday the full detailed data was made available to
researchers through Statistics Canada.
Digital Health
Another key area of collaboration with provinces and
territories is in the area of digital health.
Right now, we are asking Canadians to stay at home as
much as possible and to practice physical distancing. For
many, this may mean that access to medical professionals
and social supports is not what it once was.
The Government is looking at solutions to ensure that
Canadians have direct access to reliable health
information no matter where they are.
This includes online tools.
6
The Government of Canada recently launched an online
self-assessment tool for Canadians who are experiencing
symptoms of COVID-19. The tool complements those
already available in some provinces and territories, and
helps the user determine whether they need further testing
or medical attention.
And we are developing an online mental health portal that
will provide comprehensive psycho-social supports. This
tool will help Canadians manage their mental health during
this exceptionally stressful time, with the help of a variety
of resources.
Occupational Health and Safety
Finally, I would like to speak briefly about Health Canada’s
role in protecting the health of federal employees in the
workplace.
Through the Public Service Occupational Health
Program, and in collaboration with the Chief Human
Resources Officer, we have advised federal Departments
and Agencies on how to manage the risk of this novel
coronavirus in the workplace.
We have provided general advice and given the wide
variety of work settings in the federal public service, we
have developed targeted advice for specific workplaces.
For example, we have provided specific guidance for
7
federal employees supporting repatriation, and guidance
for those on the frontlines at our border points of entry.
Conclusion
At Health Canada, we are committed to doing everything
we can to protect the health and well-being of all
Canadians — from healthcare workers, to federal public
servants, to the people in our communities.
With the COVID-19 pandemic sweeping the globe, the
magnitude of this responsibility has never been clearer.
The Government of Canada is working around the clock to
protect the health and safety of Canadians.
Thank you.
8
Drugs and Devices
 The COVID-19 pandemic is unlike anything we have
seen in recent history. Health Canada is working
urgently to fight this virus while ensuring the safety of
Canadians.
 Health Canada plays a vital role in the Government’s
COVID-19 response as the regulator of health
products.
 With this virus spreading rapidly in our communities, it
is very important to get drugs and medical supplies
quickly to the frontlines.
 We are focused on expediting the review and
approval of drugs and devices to address COVID-19,
while continuing to ensure that these products are
safe and effective for Canadians.
 That’s why an Interim Order is a critical regulatory tool
at this time. An Interim Order is one of the fastest
mechanisms available to the Government of Canada
to help make health products available to help
address larger-scale, public health emergency
situations — such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
1
Drugs and Devices
 Just yesterday, the Minister of Health signed an
Interim Order to help prevent and alleviate
shortages. It permits the import and sale of drugs,
medical devices, and foods for a special dietary
purpose that are not approved in Canada, subject to
certain requirements to ensure continued product
quality and safety. It also provides improved access to
disinfectants and hand sanitizers.
 We have also already put in place interim measures
that will expedite access to imported products to limit
the spread of COVID-19, such as hand sanitizers, and
disinfectants.
 These measures will include giving Canadians access
to products that are approved or registered in other
jurisdictions with similar regulatory frameworks and
quality assurances, but may not fully meet some of
the regulatory requirements under the Food and
Drugs Act — such as packaging or labelling
requirements in both official languages.
 We are also expediting approval of licences related to
these products.
 So far, 11 disinfectants, 107 hand sanitizers and 59
site licences have been authorized as per interim
expedited service standards.
2
Drugs and Devices
 Earlier this month, on March 18, the Minister of Health
approved another Interim Order to allow quicker and
more flexible approval of the importation and sale of
medical devices necessary for Canada’s response to
COVID-19. These devices include personal protective
equipment for our health care personnel, ventilators
for patients, and diagnostic tests.
 This Order has already made 13 devices available,
including 6 diagnostics tests, 6 masks and 1 thermal
camera.
 Another key element of the Government’s response to
COVID-19 is ensuring we have the authorities and
tools we need to take appropriate action to protect the
health and safety of Canadians.
 The Government of Canada recently welcomed the
passage of amendments to the Food and Drugs Act
and the Patent Act that will streamline processes and
provide the Government with additional powers to:
o help prevent and mitigate shortages of drugs and
medical devices;
o seek additional information from companies to
confirm that products are safe for Canadians; and
o make, use, or sell a patented invention, such as a
medication or a ventilator, that is needed to
respond to this pandemic.
3
Drugs and Devices
 The health and safety of Canadians remains the top
priority and Health Canada is closely monitoring the
COVID-19 situation in Canada. Rest assured Health
Canada will continue to do all it can to manage this
situation and adapt quickly.
IF PRESSED …
Clinical Trials
 Health Canada is exploring how best to facilitate
clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada. Clinical
trials are conducted to determine whether new drugs,
diagnostics or treatments are both safe and effective
in human beings. Clinical trials ensure the quality of
the study product, protection of the patient, and the
proper collection and retention of outcomes. At the
same time, clinical trials provide access to trial
volunteers before new drugs, diagnostics or
treatments are approved.
 Clinical trial applications will be reviewed and
approved by Health Canada in under 30 days. There
are now 8 clinical trials authorized in Canada with
treatments targeting COVID-19.
 Until a vaccine or drug is available on the Canadian
market, Health Canada's Special Access Program is
available to practitioners requiring access to drugs
that provide supportive treatments to the infection.
4
Drugs and Devices
Our goal is to ensure that Canada is prepared for
whatever challenges come our way.
 The Special Access Program has authorised access
to an experimental drug for the treatment of 11
seriously ill patients infected with COVID-19.
International Collaboration
 Health Canada is leveraging its strong international
partnerships with: the US Food and Drug
Administration; the European Medicines Agency; the
International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory
Authorities; the World Health Organization; the Pan-
American Health Organization and the Australia,
Canada, Singapore, Switzerland Consortium. We are
collaborating with member countries to share
information and to raise our collective level of
awareness of evidence-based approaches for
vaccines and treatment. The objective is to work
towards alignment on regulatory requirements
5
Drugs and Devices
 Health Canada, through the International Coalition of
Medicines Regulatory Authorities, known as ICMRA,
is participating in COVID-19 specific discussions, is
collaborating with member countries to share
information and to raise our collective level of
awareness of evidence-based approaches for
treatment. The objective is to work towards alignment
on regulatory requirements for vaccines and
antivirals. On April 2 we will be discussing the
treatments that are available and ongoing/planned
clinical trials in their respective countries.
BACKGROUND
Medical Devices: Health Canada reviews all COVID-19-
related submissions and applications as quickly as
possible without compromising patient safety. Expedited
review and reporting processes are now in place. The list
of COVID-19 Medical Devices authorized for sale in
Canada, as well as the applications received under the
Interim Order signed by the Minister on March 18, 2020, is
available on Health Canada’s website and is updated
daily.
Under the Interim Order, manufacturers are required to
submit an abbreviated application to support the safety,
effectiveness and quality of their medical device. The fees
associated with an application through the Interim Order
pathway will be waived. In addition, manufacturers
applying through this pathway are not required to hold a
Medical Device Single Audit Programme certification. This
is the most efficient pathway manufacturers can follow in
6
Drugs and Devices
order to apply for authorization.
Healthcare professionals can request access to COVID-19
related medical devices not yet licensed in Canada, or
authorized for sale under the Interim Order pathway,
through Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP).
Drugs: When clinical trials have sufficient evidence to
support full market authorization, Health Canada will work
with sponsors to expedite the development and
authorization of these products. When expediting the
review of submissions and applications for clinical trials
with the goal of enabling timely access to vaccines and
therapeutic products, Health Canada will continue to
ensure products are supported by sufficient evidence of
safety, efficacy and quality to merit access to Canadians.
Special access by Canadian health practitioners to
unauthorized drugs is intended for serious or life-
threatening conditions where conventional therapies have
failed, are unsuitable, or are unavailable either as
marketed products or through enrollment in clinical trials.
The regulatory authority supporting the programme is
discretionary and a decision to authorize or deny a request
is made on a case-by-case basis by taking into
consideration the nature of the medical emergency, the
availability of marketed alternatives and the information
provided in support of the request regarding the use,
safety and efficacy of the drug.
7
Drug Shortages During the COVID-19 Pandemic
 The current COVID-19 pandemic is having a major
impact on Canadians and our health care system.
 Health Canada is working proactively to identify and
mitigate the impact of drug and medical device
shortages on Canadians and health care
professionals during the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic.
 We have stepped up our surveillance efforts and
adopted new, more agile processes, to help ensure
Canadians have access to the drugs and medical
devices they need.
 We have increased the frequency of our engagement
with industry, provinces and territories, healthcare and
patient groups and international partners. These
efforts are leading to earlier signal identification and
coordination of mitigation efforts.
 The Food and Drugs Act was amended last week to
clarify regulatory-making authorities related to
shortages.
Drug Shortages During the COVID-19 Pandemic
IF PRESSED ON ENHANCED CASE MANAGEMENT APPROACH …
 When drug and medical device shortages do develop,
we have implemented a new, more agile process, to
manage and mitigate the impacts on Canadians,
where possible.
 For example, Health Canada has implemented an
interim approach to facilitate expedited access to
hand sanitizers, disinfectants and personal protective
equipment. This approach is proving effective and a
number of products have already qualified for
immediate import and sale.
 Today, the Minister announced an Interim Order to
support the exceptional importation of drugs and
medical devices when required to address shortages
related to COVID-19. The Order also introduces
mandatory shortage reporting for medical devices
considered critical during the COVID-19 pandemic.
This will help the health system to plan for supplies as
needed to help ensure continued access for
Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON EXPANDED ENGAGMENT AND COLLABORATION …
 Health Canada is now working with provinces and
territories, industry, healthcare and patient groups
regularly to identify early shortage signals, potential
measures to address shortages, and coordinate
actions.
Drug Shortages During the COVID-19 Pandemic
 Health Canada has also increased the frequency of
engagement with foreign regulatory partners and is
now meeting weekly with the regulators in the US, the
UK, the EU, and the World Health Organization to
discuss actual shortages, emerging signals, global
concerns and strategic approaches.
Digital Tools/Apps Assisting with Covid-19
 The government recognizes the significant health,
economic and social impact of COVID-19 on
Canadians, with many experiencing stress and
anxiety.
 The government is working in close collaboration with
provinces and territories to ensure Canadians have
up-to-date information and evidence-based guidance
on the COVID-19 pandemic.
 For example, on March 21, we launched a self-
assessment tool on Canada.ca which allows
Canadians to assess their symptoms so that they
know whether to seek medical help or not.
 There have been over 3 million visits to the self-
assessment tool in the first week since it was
launched.
 In the coming days the Government will also be
launching other digital tools to keep Canadians
informed and safe, including virtual mental health
supports.
 The federal government will continue to work with all
of our partners to ensure that Canadians have access
to up-to-date information, tools and resources they
need.
1
Digital Tools/Apps Assisting with Covid-19
IF PRESSED …
On the mental health tool
 Health Canada is preparing to launch a single window
for access to virtual comprehensive psychosocial
supports to help Canadians with the mental toll that this
pandemic is having on many of us.
 These supports will follow a stepped care approach,
moving from triage and self monitoring tools, to mental
health promotion tools and resources, to live
psychosocial supports with providers working at a
distance.
 Health Canada is currently in the process of finalizing
who will provide the services and is working to have
this in place as soon as possible.
On self assessment tools
 The self-assessment tool provides Canadians with
essential information to help them determine whether
they may have COVID-19 symptoms, and whether
they should seek testing or additional medical
assistance.
 Canadians using these tools are able to get the
information and guidance they needed, with the aim
of reducing pressure on 811 and telehealth lines, and
for in-person services such as family doctor visits,
walk-in visits and urgent care centres.
 We will continue to work closely with provinces and
2
Digital Tools/Apps Assisting with Covid-19
territories, vendor and stakeholders on further tools
that help Canadians manage their own health and
stay safe during this pandemic.
3
Occupational Health Advice for Federal Employees
Role
 Health Canada, on behalf of Treasury Board as the
Employer, is the occupational health service provider for
the core public administration (operationally defined as
Schedules I & IV of the Financial Administration Act).
 These services are provided by the Public Service
Occupational Health Program (PSOHP).
 PSOHP has issued advice and guidance to federal
departments about appropriate precautions for
safeguarding employee health. PSOHP works very closely
with PHAC.
 Since there is a wide variety of work settings in the federal
public service, in addition to a General Occupational
Health Advisory, PSOHP has issued targeted advice for
specific workplaces. For example, we provided specific
guidance for federal employees supporting repatriation,
and guidance for those on the frontlines at our border
points of entry.
 PSOHP advice is based on the latest available information
about the virus and best practices in infection control. As
information about COVID-19 evolves, occupational health
advice for departments and employees is updated.
1
Client departments
 Some of PSOHP’s biggest client departments are critical
for Canada’s response to COVID-19, such as the Canada
Border Services Agency. Other client departments include,
Correctional Services Canada, the Canadian Coast
Guard, Indigenous Services Canada, and the Department
of National Defence.
 PSOHP also provides occupational health services and
advice to Canada-based staff deployed overseas (as well
their spouses and dependents) for organizations such as
Global Affairs Canada and Immigration, Refugees and
Citizenship Canada.
 Health Canada’s Occupational Health Advisories are
shared with departments and agencies through the
Treasury Board Secretariat’s Office of the Chief Human
Resources Officer. Departments then make decisions
about what to implement in their own department, while
working closely with their departmental occupational
health and safety programs.
 Should any departments or agencies have specific
questions or concerns, PSOHP is ready to provide
occupational health advice and guidance.
2
Union notification
 OCHRO also shares the advisories with Bargaining
Agents through the National Joint Council’s Service-Wide
Occupational Safety and Health Committee.
IF PRESSED on federally regulated workplaces under
ESDC’s Labour Program…
 Although only mandated to serve the core public
administration, PSOHP shares its advisories for use by
other organizations, including ESDC’s Labour Program.
 Similarly, we have shared the general Advisory with the
Senate and House of Commons administration.
IF PRESSED on alignment with P/T occupational health
advice….
 PSOHP does not participate in any formal F/P/T
mechanisms for occupational health and safety. However,
our health professionals liaise regularly with their
occupational health colleagues working in other
jurisdictions and in other sectors. We are also in regular
contact with key organizations like the Canadian Centre
for Occupational Health and Safety.
 We share all of the Advisories with the Public Health
Agency of Canada who engages provinces and territories
through their networks.
3
IF PRESSED on PPE requirements for front line medical
workers?
 Provincial health systems manage advice for their health
care workers and are part of the broader F/P/T Public
health networks led by PHAC.
 PSOHP is only responsible for providing advice to federal
public servants. Our colleagues at Indigenous Service
Canada and Correctional Services Canada have our
advice and are working with PHAC to ensure appropriate
guidance for their nurses.
4
FPT Engagement
 We have been working hand-in-hand with provinces
and territories (PT) on our preparations to combat the
spread of COVID-19 and to ensure coordination
across all orders of government.
 We have been engaging PTs regularly through a
number of different intergovernmental FPT tables at
the Minister, Deputy Minister and officials’ levels.
 On top of the bilateral engagement with her PT
counterparts, Minister Hajdu is holding weekly
teleconferences with all her colleagues (often twice a
week) to inform our respective response efforts.
 FPT Deputy Ministers of Health are also meeting on a
regular basis, ~2-3 times each week, as well as
bilaterally, and jointly with FPT Deputy Ministers
responsible for intergovernmental affairs, to ensure
further alignment and coordination.
o We have struck a sub-committee on health
services to manage health system pressures
related to medical supplies and assets, health
human resources, ICU capacity and other
challenges facing jurisdictions.
 Dr. Tam continues to work closely with PT Medical
officers of health across the country through a
Special Advisory Committee on COVID-19 to
1
FPT Engagement
ensure there is a consistent, evidence-based public
health approach to respond to the pandemic.
 We are also working collaboratively with PT
governments on virtual care options, including
scaling up digital tools and virtual care infrastructure
to reduce the pressures faced by health systems in
addressing COVID-19.
 On the issue of collaborative PPE procurement, we
are in regular contact with PTs and continue to
explore every possible means to ensure jurisdictions
will have the critical supplies that they need.
 To conclude, the collaboration has been exceptional
with regular information sharing between all
jurisdictions at these tables – and we will continue to
ensure all jurisdictions are well prepared to combat
the spread of COVID-19.
2
Personal Protective Equipment
 Securing the appropriate amount of personal
protective equipment for our front-line health care
workers remains our number one priority.
 These supplies are critical, there are well-documented
global shortages on these items, intense global
competition for existing PPE, and suppliers, especially
those outside of Canada, are dealing with real
logistical challenges on the delivery side.
 We are working directly with transportation and
logistics providers to clear a path for these deliveries,
and leveraging our embassies around the world to
facilitate these discussions.
 Officials are working around the clock to secure
suppliers and confirm delivery for PPE for a number
of critical items, based on the transportation
availability.
 We are working directly with provinces and territories
through the Chief Medical Officer of Health’s Strategic
Advisory Committee to assess the system’s needs,
respond to requests for assistance by allocating
supplies from the National Emergency Strategic
Stockpile, and are buying in bulk to leverage our
collective buying power.
 We are also accepting all donations that are offered
and ramping up domestic industrial capacity to fill
Personal Protective Equipment
gaps in what is needed and what is available to
ensure we have an ongoing supply of critically
needed PPE. We are assessing all donated PPE to
ensure it meets Canadian specifications.
 In addition, Health Canada is expediting the
regulatory process to ensure we are able to get
critically needed products into Canadian markets.
This includes guidance on the use of expired or
alternative PPE in the context of COVID-19. Guidance
was just issued to allow the use of expired and non-
medical grade N95 masks.
If pressed on when can PTs expect to receive PPE…
 We are working daily with our suppliers to confirm
shipments, and working to quickly assess these as
soon as these are received by the Public Health
Agency of Canada before distributing them across the
country.
 Recognizing the supply challenges with accessing
PPE globally, Health Canada has provided guidance
and market authorizations to increase the availability
of approved products for sale across the country
(Interim Order, March 18).
 It should be noted that the federal government has
taken a proactive approach in ordering PPE in which
Personal Protective Equipment
there are greater quantities ordered beyond what has
been requested by PTs.
 We are working closely with provinces and territories
to collect data on the rate at which these supplies are
being used and modelling rates of usage based on
international experiences to date. This information will
enable us to anticipate when orders will be needed
and secure products before a shortage situation
occurs. This discussion is led via the Logistical
Advisory Committee, a joint federal-provincial-
territorial forum that manages the decisions around
the allocation of PPE. This committee works directly
with all jurisdictions to understand governments to
understand their PPE needs.
If pressed on why are there still shortages of PPE
despite numerous Canadian businesses expressing
interest and/or capacity to help the Government fill the
void…
 Demand for PPE is at an all-time high, and global
manufacturing capacity is currently constrained due to
economic and transportation challenges. This has led
to a shortage of PPE on the market.
Personal Protective Equipment
 Officials at Innovation, Science and Economic
Development Canada (ISED) have been evaluating
the responses received through its “Call to action:
Canadian manufacturers needed to help combat
COVID-19” originally issued on March 26.
 They are working around the clock to determine the
viability of each proposal, which includes the
assessment of the manufacturers’ capabilities to
address the PPE shortages.
 The close collaboration between ISED and Health
Canada will ensure that all potential manufacturers
meet all the regulatory and licensing requirements.
 Officials are working around the clock to secure PPE
that is required by PTs to support frontline health care
workers.
 Many suppliers domestically and abroad are faced
with challenges – from maxed out manufacturing
capacity to delivery logistics – to fill the orders in the
timeframe required. This is why the government is
also working with Canadian manufacturers to build
capacity to fill these orders domestically.
HESA Coronavirus Documents Motion
 The Government’s primary objective was to disclose
as much information as possible that was relevant to
the Motion.
 Redactions were made as per the Motion’s
instructions to exclude matters of Cabinet confidence
and national security.
 Redactions were also made to respect the provisions
of the Privacy Act. The Government has a statutory
duty to Canadians under the Privacy Act to keep their
personal information confidential. It is especially
important that the Government respect this duty and
maintain the trust of Canadians during the current
COVID-19 outbreak.
If Pressed on why the Government made redactions
instead of relying on the Law Clerk…
 Again, the Government made every effort to disclose
as much information as possible.
 Having seen the nature of the redactions, I do not
believe that the redactions interfere, in any way, with
HESA’s ability to understand the early evolution of the
COVID outbreak through these documents.
 There is a longstanding difference of views between
the government and parliamentarians about the
power of parliamentary committees to compel the
1
HESA Coronavirus Documents Motion
production of information or documents from the
government.
 The Government’s view is that the Privacy Act is
binding on Government officials. The Government has
also taken the position that other categories of
redactions can be made (e.g., solicitor-client
privilege).
If Pressed on Health Canada’s redactions…
 The redactions to Health Canada’s documents
included the removal of Cabinet confidences and one
document that was covered by Solicitor-client
privilege.
 A small amount of personal information was also
redacted from the Health Canada documents.
If Pressed on other Government Department’s
redactions…
 My colleagues can better speak to their specific
redactions, but I know that the redactions made to
protect personal information are few in number, and
include records related to consular assistance and
personal medical conditions.
 Redactions have also been made to avoid injury to
international relations as well as relations with the
provinces and territories; to protect information
2
HESA Coronavirus Documents Motion
considered advice to a Minister; and for the protection
of government assets.
3
