Created: 2024-02-23T14:52:29.649289
Name: Hazardous_substance_assessment_-_Potassium_hydroxide
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environmental-workplace-health/occupational-health-safety/workplace-hazardous-materials-information-system/hazardous-substance-assessments/potassium-hydroxide.html
Package ID: e0340b88-f0ac-4b6a-81d8-0a53d862c0d5
Keywords: ['Hazardous substance assessments', 'Hazardous Products Regulations', 'HPR', 'HPR amendments', 'Potassium hydroxide']
Notes: Hazardous substance assessments are technical documents produced by Health Canada as educational and information resources for suppliers of hazardous products under the Hazardous Products Act (HPA) and its regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Hazardous substance assessment - Potassium hydroxide - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Environmental and Workplace Health Occupational Health and Safety Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System (WHMIS) Hazardous substance assessments Hazardous substance assessment - Potassium hydroxide Important note: Hazardous substance assessments are technical documents produced by Health Canada as educational and information resources for suppliers of hazardous products under the Hazardous Products Act (HPA) and its regulations. For more information on supplier roles and responsibilities, visit supplier responsibilities. This hazardous substance assessment was conducted according to the former and amended Hazardous Products Regulations (HPR). Learn more about the HPR amendments and transition period. Identification Chemical name: Potassium hydroxide CAS #: 1310-58-3 Chemical composition: KOH Synonyms: Potash lye; Caustic potash; Potash. UN #: 1813 (Solid), 1814 (Solution) Pictogram(s): Figure 1. Figure 1 - Text description The symbol within the pictogram shows a container dripping liquid onto a piece of metal and another container dripping liquid onto a hand. This symbol indicates that hazardous products with this pictogram can: damage or destroy metal cause irreversible damage to the skin (for example, burns, blisters, scarring) produce tissue damage in the eye or vision loss that is irreversible or not fully reversible within 21 days Figure 2. Figure 2 - Text description The symbol within the pictogram is a human skull with 2 crossed bones behind it. The symbol indicates that hazardous products with this pictogram can cause death or poisoning. WHMIS classification Health hazards: Acute Toxicity (Oral) - Category 3 Skin Corrosion - Category 1 Serious Eye Damage - Category 1 Physical hazards: Potassium hydroxide does not meet the criteria for classification. Health hazards Acute Toxicity (Oral): Category 3 Median lethal dose (LD50): 205 mg/kg (rat)Footnote 1. The available data meet the classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Oral) - Category 3 [HPR 8.1.1(1)]. Acute Toxicity (Dermal): Does not meet criteria LD50: ≤ 2,000 mg/kg and >1,260 mg/kg (rabbit) Footnote 1. In 1 non-guideline study, rabbits (1 per dose) were administered a 45% aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide in doses ranging from 1,000 mg to 3,160 mg/kg Footnote 1. No mortality occurred at 1,260 mg/kg, but 1/1 animal died at 2,000 mg/kg and above. The LD50 value was reported to be ≤ 2,000 mg/kg and >1,260 mg/kg, which is equivalent to an acute toxicity point estimate of 1,100 mg/kg as per HPR 8.1.7. Because this study involves the use of a single animal per dose, it is insufficient for classification. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Dermal). Acute Toxicity (Inhalation - Gases): Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a gas. The classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Inhalation - Gases) do not apply to this substance. Acute Toxicity (Inhalation - Vapours): No data available Acute Toxicity (Inhalation - Dusts and Mists): No data available Skin Corrosion / Irritation: Category 1 In a purposely generated animal study, 0.5 mL of 5% and 10% aqueous solutions of potassium hydroxide produced a corrosive response that exceeded the Draize grading scale (0-8) after 4 hours of application Footnote 2 following gradings at 24, 48 and 72 hours post-exposure. These results meet the classification criteria for Skin Corrosion - Category 1 [HPR 8.2.2(2)]. Several other studies also reported that 0.5 mL of 2%, 5%, and 10% aqueous solutions of potassium hydroxide produced necrosis after 4 hours of application that extended beyond the application sites [Footnote 3,Footnote 4,Footnote 5,Footnote 6,Footnote 7 ]. With the 10% solution, edema could not be evaluated due to the severity of the reactions after 4 hours of application. In another study, a 1% solution of potassium hydroxide was not corrosive in animals Footnote 5. Due to the absence of animal data looking at shorter exposure durations, subcategorization is not possible. The available data meet the classification criteria for Skin Corrosion - Category 1 [HPR 8.2.2(2)]. Serious Eye Damage / Eye Irritation: Category 1 No human data are available. In an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Test Guideline 405-compliant animal study, 0.1 mL of a 5% solution was extremely irritating and corrosive to albino rabbit eyes after a 5-minute exposure Footnote 8. The results meet the classification criteria for Serious Eye Damage – Category 1 [HPR 8.3.2(1)]. The same study reported that a 1% solution was irritating after 5-minute and 24-hour exposure periods, a 0.5% solution was slightly irritating after 24 hours of exposure, and a 0.1% solution was not irritating at all. No scores were reported. The available data meet the classification criteria for Category 1 for a ≥5% potassium hydroxide solution [HPR 8.3.2(1)]. The available data meet the classification criteria for Serious Eye Damage - Category 1 [HPR 8.3.2(1)]. Respiratory Sensitization: No data available Skin Sensitization: Does not meet criteria In the only available study, which did not follow any guidelines, an intra-cutaneous induction of 0.1 % potassium hydroxide (85% pure) in guinea pigs, 3 times weekly for a total of 9 treatments, did not result in skin sensitization when challenged with the same concentration 2 weeks after the final induction (0/5 animals responded) Footnote 6. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Skin Sensitization. Germ Cell Mutagenicity: Does not meet criteria In vivo: No studies are available. In vitro: Potassium hydroxide tested negative in an Ames test, with and without metabolic activation (based on study summary Footnote 9). Potassium hydroxide tested positive in a chromosome aberration assay in Chinese hamster ovary cells, with and without metabolic activation; however, the positive response was attributed to the non-physiological pH (10.4) of the potassium hydroxide solution tested Footnote 10. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Germ Cell Mutagenicity. Carcinogenicity: No data available Potassium hydroxide has not been reviewed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), the National Toxicology Program (NTP), or the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). No carcinogenicity studies were available. Reproductive Toxicity: No data available Specific Target Organ Toxicity - Single Exposure: Does not meet criteria Oral Route of Exposure: The acute ingestion of potassium hydroxide has been shown to cause severe corrosive burns to the esophagus, stomach and duodenum in both humans and animals Footnote 6,Footnote 11. In severe cases, deaths have been reported. As the effects can be lethal, and given that it has been classified in the more severe hazard class for this route (Acute Toxicity (Oral)), potassium hydroxide does not meet classification criteria. Dermal Route of Exposure: No data available Inhalation Route of Exposure: No data available The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Specific Target Organ Toxicity - Single Exposure. Specific Target Organ Toxicity - Repeated Exposure: No data available for oral, dermal or inhalation routes of exposure Aspiration Hazard: No data available No human data are available for potassium hydroxide. This substance is not a liquid hydrocarbon. Biohazardous Infectious Materials: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a microorganism, protein, or nucleic acid. Physical hazards Explosives: Not evaluated* * Explosives are excluded from the HPA and its regulations. Explosives are regulated under the Explosives Act. For more information, visit Natural Resources Canada. Flammable Gases: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a gas. The classification criteria for Flammable Gases do not apply to this substance. (Flammable) Aerosols: Not evaluated Classification of a hazardous product in the Flammable Aerosols or Aerosols hazard class is product dependent. Oxidizing Gases: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a gas. The classification criteria for Oxidizing Gases do not apply to this substance. Gases Under Pressure: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a gas. The classification criteria for Gases Under Pressure do not apply to this substance. Flammable Liquids: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a liquid. It is hygroscopic and dissolves readily in waterFootnote 12,Footnote 13. Potassium and hydroxide ions are quite stable in solution and, thus, potassium hydroxide is not flammable when dissolved (based on study summary Footnote 9). The classification criteria for Flammable Liquids do not apply to this substance. Flammable Solids: Does not meet criteria The inorganic element in potassium hydroxide is in its highest oxidation state, making it unable to react with oxygen, and the substance is considered non-flammable (based on study summary Footnote 9). The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Flammable Solids. Self-Reactive Substances and Mixtures: Does not meet criteria Potassium hydroxide is a non-flammable substance and is not auto-flammable up to a temperature of 400 °C (based on study summary Footnote 9). Self-Reactive Substances and Mixtures must have a self-accelerating decomposition temperature (SADT) of ≤75 °C to meet the minimum classification in this hazard class. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Self-reactive Substances and Mixtures. Pyrophoric Liquids: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a liquid. The classification criteria for Pyrophoric Liquids do not apply to this substance. Pyrophoric Solids: Does not meet criteria The inorganic element in potassium hydroxide is in its highest oxidation state, making it unable to react with oxygen (based on study summary Footnote 9). The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Pyrophoric Solids. Self-Heating Substances and Mixtures: Does not meet criteria Potassium hydroxide did not demonstrate auto-flammability at temperatures up to 400°C (based on study summary Footnote 9), which is well above the maximum spontaneous ignition temperature of 140°C for classification. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Self-heating Substances and Mixtures. Substances and Mixtures which, in Contact with Water, Emit Flammable Gases: Does not meet criteria Potassium hydroxide is a strong alkali that dissociates completely in water into the potassium ion (K+) and hydroxyl ion (OH-). The dissolution/dissociation in water is strongly exothermic, so a vigorous reaction occurs when potassium hydroxide is added to water (based on study summary Footnote 9). However, no testing has been done in accordance with test N.5 of sub-section 33.5.4 of Part III of the Manual of Tests and Criteria to determine a classification. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Substances and Mixtures which, in Contact with Water, Emit Flammable Gases. Oxidizing Liquids: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a liquid. The classification criteria for Oxidizing Liquids do not apply to this substance. Oxidizing Solids: No data available While potassium hydroxide does not meet the exclusion of paragraph 7.14.1(1)(c) of the HPR, no data from a test referred to in subsection 7.14.1(2) of the HPR are available for evaluation. Organic Peroxides: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is an inorganic compound and is not a peroxide. The classification criteria for Organic Peroxides do not apply to this substance. Corrosive to Metals: No data available Potassium hydroxide, when wet, attacks metals such as aluminium, tin, lead and zinc to produce flammable hydrogen gas (based on study summary Footnote 9). Two publications have reported corrosion rate values for potassium hydroxide on aluminum, > 50 mil/year (equivalent to >1.27 mm/year at 15°C, 5-90% KOH in aqueous solution) Footnote 14 and 0.8 mg.cm-2.min-1 (equivalent to 7.8 mm/year at 50°C, 22.5% KOH in aqueous solution) Footnote 15. The temperatures used in the above studies are not those required by the test method prescribed in section 7.16.1 of the HPR (55°C). As such, no data are available that are suitable to determine whether potassium hydroxide meets the classification criteria for Corrosive to Metals. Combustible Dusts: No data available No data are available to determine whether potassium hydroxide meets the classification criteria for Combustible Dusts. Simple Asphyxiants: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a gas. The classification criteria for Simple Asphyxiants do not apply to this substance. Pyrophoric Gases: Not applicable Potassium hydroxide is not a gas. The classification criteria for Pyrophoric Gases do not apply to this substance. Chemicals Under Pressure: Not evaluated Classification of a hazardous product in the Chemicals Under Pressure hazard class is product dependent. Regulatory and other information Regulatory information: Hazardous substance assessments are prepared by Health Canada as educational and information resources. Under the HPA, suppliers of hazardous products must, upon the sale or importation of a hazardous product, provide safety data sheet and label that meet the requirements set out in the HPR. Other information: The information and classifications contained in these hazardous substance assessments are based on publicly available sources, such as peer-reviewed literature or reports by international bodies. New information, including proprietary information, could have an impact on the classification of substances or hazardous products containing them. It is the responsibility of the supplier to ensure the accuracy, sufficiency, and reliability of their hazardous product classifications. Last updated: 2022 Prepared by: Workplace Hazardous Materials Bureau, Health Canada References Footnote 1 Monsanto Co (1975) Initial Submission: Toxicological Investigation Of: 45%KOH with Cover Letter dated 081392. EPA/OTS Doc #: 88-920007525. NTIS/OTS0538608. Return to footnote 1 referrer Footnote 2 Nixon, G. A. et al (1990) Evaluation of modified methods for determining skin irritation. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 12:127-136. Return to footnote 2 referrer Footnote 3 ECETOC (1995) Skin Irritation and Corrosion: Reference Chemicals Data Bank. European Centre for Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals, Brussels, Brussels, Belgium. Technical Report. Volume 66. Return to footnote 3 referrer Footnote 4 Bagley, D. M. et al (1996) Skin irritation: reference chemicals data bank. Toxicology in Vitro 10:1:1-6. Return to footnote 4 referrer Footnote 5 Vernot, E. H. et al (1977) Acute toxicity and skin corrosion data for some organic and inorganic compounds and aqueous solutions. Toxicology & Applied Pharmacology 42:417-423. Return to footnote 5 referrer Footnote 6 Johnson, G. T., Lewis, T. R., and Wagner, W. D. (1975) Acute toxicity of cesium and rubidium compounds. Toxicology & Applied Pharmacology 32:239-245. Return to footnote 6 referrer Footnote 7 Nixon, G. A., Tyson, C. A., and Wertz, W. C. (1975) Interspecies comparisons of skin irritancy. Toxicology & Applied Pharmacology 31:3:481-490. Return to footnote 7 referrer Footnote 8 NIOSH et al (1972) Acute Toxicity Studies of Cesium and Rubidium Compounds. EPA/OTS Doc #: DCN178366. NTIS/OTSPB85-5178341. Return to footnote 8 referrer Footnote 9 European Chemicals Agency (2011) Potassium hydroxide - REACH dossier. Available at: http://www.echa.europa.eu/ Return to footnote 9 referrer Footnote 10 Morita, T. et al (1989) Effects of pH in the in vitro chromosomal aberration test. Mutation Research 225:55-60. Return to footnote 10 referrer Footnote 11 Zargar, S. A. et al (1992) Ingestion of strong corrosive alkalis: Spectrum of injury to upper gastrointestinal tract and natural history. The American Journal of Gastroenterology 87:3:337-341. Return to footnote 11 referrer Footnote 12 The Merck Index: An encyclopedia of chemicals, drugs and biologicals (2013). 15th Edition. O'Neill, M. J. Royal Society of Chemistry, Merck & Co., Inc, Cambridge, UK. Return to footnote 12 referrer Footnote 13 Rumble, J. (2019) CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. 100 Edition. J. Rumble (Eds.). CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. Return to footnote 13 referrer Footnote 14 Schweitzer, P. A. (1995) Corrosion resistance tables: metals, nonmetals, coatings, mortars, plastics, elastomers and linings, and fabrics 4 Edition Marcel Dekker. New York, Corrosion Technology, pp. 2685-2708. Return to footnote 14 referrer Footnote 15 ASM International (1995) Handbook of Corrosion Data. 2nd Edition. D. B. Craig and D. B. Anderson (Eds.). ASM International. Return to footnote 15 referrer Page details Date modified: 2023-03-27 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy