Created: 2024-01-31T18:51:41.450508
Name: Compliance_Verification_Project_2020-2021:_Cribs,_Cradles_and_Bassinets_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/compliance-verification-project-2021-2022-cribs-cradles-bassinets-regulations.html
Package ID: e13f92fa-4af1-4039-895f-75992c86d454
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'CCPSA', 'compliance verification project', 'compliance of bassinets', 'Cribs-Cradles-and-Bassinets Regulations']
Notes: The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of bassinets with the specific requirements of the Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Compliance Verification Project 2020-2021: Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Compliance Verification Project 2020-2021: Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report Fiscal Year 2020-2021 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of bassinets with the specific requirements of the Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations. For this project, compliance of select bassinets with the Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors contacted establishments and sampled relevant products. Compliance with the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CV project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of bassinet companies in Canada. Companies were sent a letter to advise them of the project and their responsibilities under the CCPSA. Targets for compliance verification were selected from companies identified as part of the market survey. Over the course of the 2020-2021 fiscal year, mechanical testing of 14 different products was carried out. The testing resulted in four recalls, one stop distributions, and seven commitments to address non-compliance. There were two instances in which no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed, and corrective actions taken during this project: Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Arm's Reach The Co-Sleeper Versatile Bassinet Bed Bath and Beyond (online retailer) Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Arm's Reach Concept, Inc. BABYZEN YOYO Ella + Elliot (online retailer) Did not meet the cord/strap loop, mattress thickness, side height, and labelling requirements Voluntary recall by BABYZEN Badger Basket Company Hooded Moses Basket Walmart (online retailer) Did not meet the stability, cord/strap length, side height and labelling requirements Voluntary recall by Badger Basket Company Chicco Lullago Portable Bassinet EI Brand Management, Inc. No compliance issues detected None Evenflo Loft Portable Bassinet - Grey Melange Best Buy (online retailer) Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Evenflo Fisher-Price Soothing Motions Bassinet Mattel Canada No compliance issues detected None Graco Dream Suite Bassinet Newell Brands Canada Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Newell Brands Canada Ingenuity Foldaway Rocking Bassinet (Fletcher) West Coast Kids (online retailer) Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Kids II, Inc. Lil Jumbl Bedside Bassinet with Canopy and Music Wayfair LLC (online retailer) Did not meet the stability, side height, and labelling requirements Voluntary recall by C&A Marketing, Inc. Monte Rockwell Bassinet Monte Group Design Did not meet the side height and labelling requirements Commitment by Monte Group Design Munchkin Brica Fold 'n Go Travel Bassinet Munchkin, Inc. Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Munchkin, Inc. Nuna DEMI Grow Bassinet EI Brand Management, Inc. Did not meet the side height requirement Stop distribution by EI Brand Management, Inc. SNOO Smart Sleeper Bassinet Indigo Books & Music Inc. (online retailer) Did not meet the entanglement and labelling requirements Commitment by Happiest Baby, Inc. Valco Baby Trend Bassinet Valco Baby Did not meet the stability, restraint and labelling requirements Voluntary recall by Valco Baby Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CV projects are very small, the findings of CV projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report IncidentsSubscribe to Consumer Product Safety NewsMonitor Consumer Product Safety RecallsContact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2023-05-15 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy