Created: 2024-11-22T21:01:42.370515
Name: HESA_Study_on_Opioids_
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/e3e20770-4658-42fa-b3f8-408208020b21/resource/10558f58-e3da-41ba-8bd7-567fdc72d85d/download/hesa-study-on-opioids-min-saks-proative-disclosure.pdf
Package ID: e3e20770-4658-42fa-b3f8-408208020b21
Keywords: ['Opioids', 'HESA', 'Study']
Notes: Minister Saks's appearance before the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) - Study on Opioids.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA)
Study on Opioids
BRIEFING BINDER
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
February 1, 2024
West Block
Ottawa, Ontario
Appearance before the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) - Study on Opioids
Table of Contents
PART A. KEY LINES
(1) Canada’s Model - Approach and Effectiveness
(2) Canada’s Model - Expert Task Force on Substance Use (ETFSU) Recommendations
(3) Canada’s Model - Recommendations from the 2016 HESA Opioid Study
(4) Harm Reduction - Effectiveness and Evidence
(5) Safer Supply - Rationale and Evidence
(6) Safer Supply - Letters Received
(7) Safer Supply - Criticism – Diversion, Creates New Users
(8) Safer Supply - Prescribing Safer Supply for Youth
(9) Supervised Consumption Sites - Rationale and Evidence
(10) Supervised Consumption Sites - Evidence of SCS
(11) Supervised Consumption Sites - Community Safety / Proximity to Schools
(12) Supervised Consumption Sites - South Riverdale Community Health Centre (SRCHC)
(13) Decriminalization - Rationale and Evidence to Date
(14) Decriminalization - Support for Decriminalization
(15) Decriminalization - Local Bylaws for Public Use
(16) Decriminalization - British Columbia Supreme Court Ruling of Blocking New Public Drug Use Law
(17) Decriminalization - National Decriminalization
(18) Decriminalization - Possession of 2.5g (why this amount)
(19) Treatment or Recovery Services - Federal Actions to Support PT Delivery; Wait Times
(20) Treatment or Recovery Services - Impact of Federal Funding
(21) Treatment or Recovery Services - Involuntary Treatment
(22) Treatment or Recovery Services - Recovery
(23) Prevention
(24) Enforcement - Effectiveness of Actions
(25) Enforcement - International Partnerships
(26) Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) - Impact (metrics for evaluation)
(27) Litigation Against Pharmaceutical Companies
(28) Declaration of a Public Health Emergency
(29) Support for Indigenous Communities
(30) Support for Rural and Remote Communities
(31) Housing Insecurity/Homelessness and Substance Use
(32) Mental Health and Substance Use Standards
PART B. QUICK STATS
(33) Key Stats
Substance Use Prevalence in Canada
Costs of Substance Use and Harms in Canada Overdose Deaths and Harms
Indigenous Peoples Safer Supply Projects
Supervised Consumption Sites (SCS) Naloxone Training and Distribution Substance Use and Addictions
Program (SUAP) Declarations of Emergency
Federal Funding
Mental Health and Substance Use in Canada
PART C: SUPPLEMENTAL
(34) Scenario Note
(35) Follow-up from December 4, 2023 Officials Appearance (Draft)
(36) Status of Recommendations from the 2016 HESA Study on the Opioid Crisis in Canada
(37) Summary of articles related to risk mitigation guidance for safer supply
(38) Youth Substance Use Prevention Grants and Contributions Program (YSUPP)
(39) Recent OPQs
PART A. KEY LINES
Canada’s Model
(1) Approach and Effectiveness
Since 2016, the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy has guided our approach to substance use
policy.
Our Government has invested over $1 billion in a continuum of evidence-based actions in order to
prevent and reduce harms of substance use and to support people getting the help they need.
The renewed CDSS is a comprehensive framework guiding our efforts to address the toxic drug and
overdose crisis, centered on promoting public health and protecting public safety.
It also supports ongoing education activities to reduce stigma and provides funding to community-led
projects targeting populations disproportionally impacted by substance use harms.
(2) Expert Task Force on Substance Use (ETFSU) Recommendations
We appreciate the excellent work of the Expert Task Force on Substance Use whose mandate was to
provide advice to inform our Government’s renewed Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy.
It is important that our actions be informed by the independent advice of experts. The Department is
working to establish an Expert Advisory Committee that would provide council and inform and
strengthen federal actions to address the overdose crisis.
(3) Recommendations from the 2016 HESA Opioid Study
The majority involved collaboration and shared responsibilities with provinces and territories, Indigenous
communities, or regulatory authorities.
In the ongoing efforts to address the crisis, the majority of the recommendations were completed.
As the Committee is aware, the crisis has evolved significantly over the last eight years, as have the
actions needed to address it. We will welcome recommendations from this committee to build upon the
work already achieved in responding to the previous recommendations
Harm Reduction
(4) Effectiveness and Evidence
Harm reduction provides life saving, medical services that meet people where they are at, and help them
connect with health and social services, such as treatment and housing.
In the face of a public health emergency we must scale up life saving tools – like supervised consumption
sites that have responded to over 52,000 overdoses since 2017.
Harm reduction is an essential part of our response – along with prevention, treatment and
enforcement.
It provides a life line to support people in the face of current gaps in services, including people who face
stigma, delays or other barriers in accessing treatment.
Our government will use every tool at our disposal to end this national public health crisis.
Safer Supply
(5) Rationale and Evidence
Prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives, sometimes referred to as “safer supply”, is one approach among
many that we are exploring to help reduce the number of harms and deaths from an increasingly deadly,
toxic illegal drug supply.
The evidence base is growing. We are aware of a range of studies showing benefits to clients. We are
also aware of studies and reports of risks and unintended consequences.
A study recently published in the British Medical Journal showed that prescribed pharmaceutical
alternative to the illicit street drug supply in British Columbia significantly reduced the risk of death in
people with opioid use disorder (by as much as 89%).
We are also seeing promising early results from Health Canada-funded pilot projects, such as reports of
reduced overdoses, reduced illegal drug use, and improved physical and mental health.
I am also aware of concerns raised by some experts. We are and will continue to examine and assess all
credible evidence.
We are very mindful of the lessons learned from the overprescribing of opioids in the early 2000s, which
contributed to the current overdose crisis.
That said, there are some fundamental differences between that experience and safer supply programs:
Safer supply is being pilot-tested on a small scale, so we can study both benefits and risks.
There is ongoing patient monitoring of clients, with continued connection to health professionals, and
often to other critical services and supports like mental health services and housing.
Clients of safer supply programs are already using illegal drugs and struggle with addiction, and many
have been unsuccessful with first-line forms of drug treatment (e.g., methadone).
(6) Letters Received
I recognize that there are differing views among experts.
I have met with, and received letters, from physicians, researchers and practitioners calling for changes
to these programs, as well as for increasing support for these programs.
All Healthcare professionals, must follow rules around the secure handling of controlled substances,
including measures to help prevent diversion.
Provinces and territories also have professional standards and mandated obligations that must be
adhered to.
I have asked officials to look into the program thoroughly and take appropriate action where and when
necessary.
I am committed to hearing and learning from experts with a range of views to learn from current
experience and inform this practice moving forward.
(7) Criticism – Diversion, Creates New Users
I am aware of concerns expressed by some physicians about the risk of diversion from unwitnessed take
home dosing from safer supply programs.
I take these concerns very seriously. I asked my officials to further investigate these reports and take
steps to ensure that the pilot projects we are funding have appropriate safeguards and controls diversion
measures in place.
Officials undertook a detailed assessment of the risk mitigation measures of all federally funded
programs providing pharmaceutical alternatives.
Most programs demonstrated strong approaches and have a range of protocols in place. In the instances
where further information or improvements are required, officials have reached out to these sites.
Projects have implemented a number of practices to help reduce diversion risk, including:
Patient screening
Matching drugs to patient tolerance
Risk-based protocols for assessing patient eligibly for take-home dosing
Patient monitoring
Actions to address instances of diversion, which can include:
switching to observed dosing;
transfer into a different support services; or
removal from program.
On January 30th, Health Canada is hosting an expert roundtable on assessing, measuring and mitigating
diversion risk related to these services.
Officials are also convening federally-funded projects this month (in February) to review their protocols,
share the latest evidence and ensure they are implementing promising practices.
In addition, we continue to support the evaluation of programs, to inform our actions moving forward.
These actions are important to mitigate risks. At the same time, I recognize we will need to continue to
closely monitor these programs and analyse the evidence to inform our way forward and any further
adjustments that may be needed.
The diversion of controlled substances is illegal. We continue to support law enforcement actions to
address drug trafficking and support community safety.
(8) Prescribing Safer Supply for Youth - as outlined BC Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU) safer supply
prescribing guidelines
Youth have particular vulnerabilities and it is essential that additional care and caution is taken to
support them in dealing with substance use and addictions.
The decision to provide any kind of medical intervention to a patient is a choice for medical practitioners
and patients to make based on a patient’s medical needs, safety considerations, and available medical
guidelines.
The suggestion that safer supply programs simply hand out prescription drugs to youth is incorrect.
As of the most recent reporting period of November 2023, no youth under the age of 19 have been
prescribed fentanyl as an alternative to illicit drugs since the Province’s Risk
Mitigation Guidance was released in March 2020.
At the federal level, we continue to support a number of youth-focused prevention initiatives to help
increase awareness of the dangers of substance use, including:
developing tools to prevent substance-related harms among youth in school;
the "Know More" awareness campaign which aims to engage teens and young adults on the facts
surrounding opioids and ways to reduce risks; and
a new Youth Substance Use Prevention Program
Supervised Consumption Sites
(9) Rationale and Evidence
Harm reduction is health care and the door to the system. Safe consumption sites have responded to
over 52,000 overdoses since 2017 and have seen over 4.3 million visits.
Closing supervised consumption sites would mean increasing the risk of more deaths, diseases and
infections and less access to a range of services which people who use drugs rely on.
We are focused on all the key pillars of drug policy; prevention, harm reduction, treatment, and recovery,
as well as enforcement efforts to protect our communities. This is not the time to be pitting harm
reduction against treatment.
(10) Evidence of SCS
Through CIHR, the Government of Canada allocated $1 million on four one-year SCS evaluation projects
across the country.
Most research on SCS suggests that sites do not increase crime, and can even help improve public order
in their surrounding communities.
Research also shows that SCS can reduce the number of drug related harms and improve the health of
people who use drugs
Some studies have found reduced overdose deaths in the vicinity of SCS.
Example: Researchers at the University of Alberta found a statistically significant association
between increased visits to a provincial SCS and a decline in fentanyl-related overdose
deaths. When visits to the sites dropped due to pandemic restrictions, deaths related to a fentanyl
overdose increased by nearly 120% (between Q1 & Q2 of 2020).
Example: A study from the Centre on Drug Policy Evaluation found that, since 2017, the implementation
of nine SCS in Toronto has led to a 67% reduction in overdose mortality rates as far as five kilometres
away from the sites.
Evidence also shows that smoking is the most common form of consumption amongst those who die of
an overdose. We must adapt our services, like SCS, and work with other levels of Government and
partners to find innovative solutions to reduce harms.
For example, through SUAP, the Government of Canada is funding a virtual National Overdose Response
Service (NORS) reaching many individuals who cannot access a SCS.
(11) Community Safety / Proximity to Schools
Everyone deserves to feel safe and welcome in their community.
All levels of government have a shared responsibility and need to work together so that there are safe
environments for our children, while we also providing these evidence-based, life-saving services .
supervised consumption sites must specify how community concerns, such as proximity to schools, will
be mitigated.
Sites are also required to have processes in place for ongoing community engagement and to take
appropriate mitigation measures to address concerns, such as foot patrols to reduce discarded drug use
equipment in public spaces around sites.
Through the renewed Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy, Budget 2023 committed to streamline
authorizations for supervised consumption sites and drug checking services with clear public health and
safety requirements for organizations seeking to provide these life-saving services to Canadians.
(12) South Riverdale Community Health Centre (SRCHC)
Health Canada contacted South Riverdale immediately upon being made aware of the serious
allegations.
As per the site’s written statement, they have indicated that they do not allow the dealing of controlled
substances or of illegal goods at the site.
Health Canada also spoke with the province who previously appointed a supervisor who currently works
at the site and tasked a third-party review, which is currently ongoing. We will continue to stay in regular
contact.
Supervised consumption sites must comply with the terms and conditions of their exemption which
strictly prohibit dealing of controlled substances within a site.
Decriminalization
(13) Rationale and Evidence to Date
BC asked for this 3 year time-limited exemption that began in January 2023.
The exemption seeks to reduce stigma and the resulting barriers to accessing the health and social
services by lifting criminal penalties for the possession of small amount of drugs.
We take the safety of all Canadians seriously, that’s why from the beginning we have approached this
from both a public health and a public safety perspective.
This exemption will be continuously monitored, assessed and adjusted if needed.
Local governments do have tools and by laws they can amend to address any unintended consequences
or concerns, of which we have always maintained we would be closely monitoring BC.
(14) Support for Decriminalization
A broad range of stakeholders have called for the decriminalization of personal possession as one part of
a comprehensive strategy, including: Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police, Canadian Nurses
Association, Canadian Society of Addiction Medicine, and the First Nations Health Authority.
This is in addition to a variety of drug policy experts and stakeholders, as well as municipalities and
medical officers of health.
We remain open to engaging with stakeholders with a range of views.
(15) Local Bylaws for Public Use
The exemption granted to BC does not change the ability of local governments to pass or amend their
bylaws as they know the best needs of their community and how to respond to it.
Stigma has led people to die alone.
We continue to work relentlessly to reduce substance use related harms.
Our government recognizes the tremendous work B.C. has been doing across the full continuum of care
to address the overdose crisis and we will continue to work with them to save lives.
(16) British Columbia Supreme Court Ruling of Blocking New Public Drug Use Law
As this matter is in front of the court I won’t comment further.
(17) National Decriminalization
We are committed to saving lives and making sure people who use drugs don’t die alone.
Our government is moving forward on decriminalization through a responsible framework and in
partnership with a jurisdiction that has a comprehensive plan with oversight and evaluation and ensures
enhanced health and social supports, public engagement, and law enforcement training.
We continue to work with willing jurisdictions to use all tools at our disposal to address this crisis,
including approaches to decriminalization.
(18) Possession of 2.5g (why this amount)
This crisis has taken a tragic toll on families, loved ones and communities.
In granting this cumulative threshold, we considered purchasing and use patterns, public health data,
and law enforcement data.
The 2.5 gram cumulative threshold that was approved by Health Canada is supported by the Canadian
Association of Chiefs of Police.
The composition of the drug supply is changing and is often a combination of substances frequently
unknown even to those who use substances.
We continue to work closely with BC to monitor the exemption to ensure it is meeting the public health
and public safety objectives.
Treatment or Recovery Services
(19) Federal Actions to Support PT Delivery; Wait Times
This Government is investing close to $200 billion over 10 years to support provinces and territories with
the Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians Plan.
Mental health and substance use is one of the priority areas under the plan. These substantial transfers
will support provinces and territories to expand access to quality treatment services, including detox.
In addition, recognizing the importance of timely and quality treatment, this Government:
has removed barriers to accessing medications for the treatment of opioid use disorder;
is working with provinces and territories on sharing wise practices, such as developing standards for
mental health and substance use;
is funding treatment projects (through SUAP), including the development of clinical guidelines and the
expansion of rapid access addiction medicine clinics.
I am meeting with my provincial and territorial counterparts on a regular basis, and am pleased to say
that we have had productive discussions around shared priorities and sharing best practices to address
mental health and substance use.
(20) Impact of Federal Funding
Further to funding we provided through the Emergency Treatment Fund, several provinces and
territories reported important progress, including a reduction in the average wait times to access opioid
use disorder treatment.
In the Northwest Territories, average wait times for opioid agonist therapy were reduced from 5-7 days
in July 2019 to approximately 1 day after October 2019.
In Newfoundland and Labrador, average wait times for opioid agonist therapy after referral were reduced
from an average of 4-5 weeks in September 2018, to a consistent 1-2 days from 2019-2023.
In Saskatchewan, the average wait time to access an opioid agonist therapy prescriber in Saskatoon fell
by 86% (from 20.7 days in 2018-2020 to 2.8 days in 2022-23).
(21) Involuntary Treatment
The evidence is clear, in order to reduce the harms associated with substance use, a full continuum of
supports is necessary to meet people where they are at, including treatment for those who are ready for
it.
We understand that seeking treatment is an individual choice and recovery looks different for everyone.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution.
(22) Recovery
Our Government supports the full spectrum of options to address substance use, including recovery.
We understand that recovery looks different for everyone.
We must invest in evidence-based services so that individuals receive quality and timely care and
supports.
(23) Prevention
Our prevention efforts are tailored to reach people most-at- risk.
For example, through Budget 2023, we committed $20.2 million for a new Youth Substance Use
Prevention Program to support communities across Canada build capacity to implement and adapt the
Icelandic Prevention Model.
The internationally recognized model focuses on building strong and healthy communities, instead of
targeting individual behaviour.
It has been shown to be effective in decreasing long-term substance use among youth.
In addition, we have invested in public education activities designed to raise awareness around the risks
of opioids, overdoses, and stigma reduction in youth and men-at-risk.
Know More Opioids engages teens and young adults on the facts surrounding opioids, ways to reduce
risks and the harms of stigma (over 178,000 interactions with people through school and festival events
since April 2018).
Ease the Burden campaign to raise awareness and reduce harms associated with the use of opioids and
other substances as well as stigma, especially for men in physically demanding jobs (over 26.8M views of
campaign video).
Enforcement
(24) Effectiveness of Actions
We are working closely with public safety and criminal justice partners and internationally to:
help identify and disrupt the flow of illegal drugs and precursors across our borders;
identify and address money laundering of the proceeds of illegal drug trafficking; and
investigate and charge criminal actors suspected in the manufacturing and/or trafficking of illegal drugs.
Canada is working closely with the United States to disrupt the illegal drug supply, including trafficking,
through forums such as the North American Drug Dialogue and the Canada- US Opioids Action Plan.
Example: Canada and the U.S. performed a joint audit of facilities and detection technology at ports of
entry along the Canada-US border to identify existing tools with a view to sharing resources.
Example: Officers in the Canadian and U.S. Postal
systems have conducted joint training in the detection of trafficked substances.
Example: A joint Canada-U.S. initiative to target and
intercept precursor chemicals from source countries. This project focuses on precursor chemicals and
clandestine laboratory equipment.
Example: We have implemented 82 safe examination areas at high-risk ports of entry to help border
services officers to identify and safely examine shipments suspected to contain opioids.
We have taken regulatory action to make it harder to access precursor chemicals used to make synthetic
drugs like fentanyl.
Those who conduct prohibited activities with controlled substances, such as trafficking or diversion, are
subject to criminal penalties.
Specific questions about enforcement operations would best be directed to my colleague, the
Honourable Dominic LeBlanc, Minister of Public Safety, Democratic Institutions and Intergovernmental
Affairs.
(25) International Partnerships
Our government is taking strong action with our North American allies to disrupt illegal global drug
supply.
Canada is active in international efforts to address drug- related issues, including trafficking, through
forums such as the North American Drug Dialogue, and in partnership with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
We work closely with the US to coordinate cross-border activities through the Canada-US Opioids Action
Plan.
We are also actively engaged in the Trilateral Fentanyl Committee, that, together with the United States
and Mexico, is working to disrupt global fentanyl supply chains.
My Department also shares information regularly on drug trends, emerging drugs and clandestine lab
information with partners like the United States, to better track emerging substances and the illegal
market.
Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP)
(26) Impact (metrics for evaluation)
Since 2017, we have committed more than $500 million in over 390 projects to minimize substance use
harms and improve health outcomes for Canadians.
Examples include:
Through national naloxone training efforts, 1.5 million Canadians had an increased understanding on
how to respond to an overdose.
To date, SUAP projects have contributed to the availability of nearly 3,000 harm reduction services,
including counselling, opioid agonist treatment (OAT), drug checking and the provision of needed harm
reduction supplies.
SUAP has also increased peer-support and participation in community services across Canada, and
strengthened access to the continuity of care through wraparound services.
(27) Litigation Against Pharmaceutical Companies
We have been working with BC since 2019 on litigation against pharmaceutical companies and
consultants they worked with, and were part of the Purdue Settlement – the largest settlement of a
government health care cost claim in Canadian history.
At our request, BC also amended their legislation to reinforce the federal government’s participation in
these Class Actions. NS and QC have introduced similar legislation that also includes Canada.
Canada has addressed pharmaceutical companies’ predatory practices by further restricting the
marketing of opioids and increasing maximum financial penalties.
(28) Declaration of a Public Health Emergency
This Government recognizes the overdose crisis and the tragic levels of overdose deaths and harms we
are currently facing.
We are using all of our tools to take a comprehensive approach to respond to this crisis, including
significant investments of over $1 billion since 2017.
The Emergencies Act is intended to serve as a tool of last resort to ensure the safety and security of
Canadians.
It is for cases of temporary, critical national emergencies that cannot be addressed with existing laws.
The Act is not an appropriate mechanism to address this crisis – a sustained and coordinated response is
needed.
(29) Indigenous Communities
We know that Indigenous Peoples have been disproportionately impacted by the overdose crisis, due to
factors such as:
Colonialism
Systemic and institutional racism
Lack of access to culturally-appropriate substance use services and supports
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) is providing more than $650 million each year to help address mental
wellness and substance use prevention and treatment in First Nations and Inuit communities through its
Mental Wellness Program.
As part of this Government’s comprehensive approach, I am supporting my colleague, the Honourable
Patti Hajdu, Minister of ISC, in increasing access to trauma-informed, culturally appropriate and quality
substance use services and supports.
Example: Through financial support from the Substance Use and Addictions Program, the Six Nations of
the Grand River is delivering an overdose prevention program in Ohsweken, Ontario that provides
culturally- safe harm reduction, education, and outreach services.
The program has had a positive impact in training community members in overdose response,
distributing naloxone kits, and providing harm reduction services.
CIHR is also supporting the creation of an Indigenous
Engagement Platform, under CRISM, which will encourage substance use research and knowledge
mobilization that is grounded in Indigenous ways of knowing, priorities and values.
(30) Rural and Remote Communities
We know that people living in rural communities, including remote Indigenous communities, face
significantly higher barriers to accessing harm reduction and treatment services.
We continue to work with provinces and territories to support expanded access to services.
(31) Housing Insecurity/Homelessness and Substance Use
This Government recognizes that there are many contributing factors to substance use, including
housing instability and homelessness.
I am working with provincial and territorial Ministerial counterparts to identify promising interventions
to address the complex needs of people who use substances, face mental health challenges and
experience homelessness or unstable housing.
It is essential that all levels of government, with local organizations and experts work together to provide
comprehensive supports to meet the needs of the most vulnerable in our communities.
Specific questions about housing insecurity and homelessness would best be directed to my colleague,
the Honourable Sean Fraser, Minister of Housing, Infrastructure, and Communities.
(32) Mental Health and Substance Use Standards
The Government is taking a compassionate and human- centred approach to help improve mental health
and substance use health care services in Canada.
We are working with the Standards Council of Canada to develop standards and guidelines in key areas.
This includes withdrawal management, sometimes called “detox,” and prescriber competencies for non-
addiction providers.
Our goal is to help ensure services meet an established level of quality and accessibility. This includes
reducing stigma and promoting health equity.
These standards are being informed by evidence and engagement with hundreds of stakeholders,
including people with lived and living experience.
We expect the standards deliverables to be completed and available for adoption by health organizations
and provincial and territorial governments by March 31, 2024.
PART B. QUICK STATS
(33) Key Stats
Substance Use Prevalence in Canada
Use of Illegal Drugs (past-year, including heroin, cocaine, etc. obtained from illegal drug market)
General Population: 3% in 2019 (the most recent data available) – Rates are stable since 2017 (CADS,
2019)
Youth: 7% in youth grades 7-12 and 12% in post-secondary students in 2021-22 (CSTADS, 2021-22;
CPADS, 2021-22).
use is higher among transgender, gender diverse and/or questioning students
Use of Pharmaceuticals (including opioid-pain relievers and sedatives) for Non-Therapeutic Reasons
(past-year)
General population: 2% in 2019 (the most recent data available)
this is 4X the rate in 2013 (0.5%) and 2X the rate in 2017 (1%) (CADS, 2019)
Youth: 7% in youth grades 7-12 and 13% among postsecondary students (CSTADS, 2021-22; CPADS, 2021-
22).
Costs of Substance Use and Harms in Canada
(Source: CCSA & CSUCH, Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms, 2023.)
Substance use cost Canada more than $49 billion, and led to over 200 deaths every day in 2020
Opioids alone accounted for $7.1 billion (14.4% of total costs)
This includes healthcare/criminal justice costs, lost productivity and other direct costs
Overdose Deaths and Harms
There were 40,642 apparent opioid toxicity deaths between January 2016 and June 2023
In the first 6 months of 2023 (Jan-June):
There were approx. 22 deaths a day
Fentanyl was involved in 84% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths.
80% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths involved opioids that were only non- pharmaceutical in origin
Most accidental opioid toxicity deaths occurred in:
men (72%)
people aged 20-59 (89%)
Multiple substance use is a factor:
54% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths involved a stimulant
81% of accidental stimulant toxicity deaths involved an opioid
Impacts on broader health system as well:
24% increase in opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations in Canada during the first two years of the
pandemic (April 2020-March 2022), compared to the two years prior to the pandemic (April 2018-March
2020) (CCSA, 2022).
Regional Variations
89% of accidental opioid-related deaths occurred in B.C., Alberta and Ontario from January to June 2023
– although rates were also elevated in Saskatchewan and Yukon.
British Columbia (Source: BC Coroners Report, 2024)
In 2023, there were 2,511 suspected unregulated drug deaths in B.C. This is the highest number of
suspected deaths ever recorded in a year (5% higher than 2022).
83% of unregulated drug deaths involved fentanyl or fentanyl analogues
Comparison to the U.S.
Since 2016, trends in opioid-related deaths have evolved similarly in both countries. However, the
magnitude of the crisis has been greater in the US.
In 2022, there were 28.7 opioid-related deaths per 100,000 population in the US compared to 19.3
opioid-related deaths per 100,000 population in Canada.
There are also similarities in the characteristics of opioid-related deaths in the two countries; notably,
more deaths occurred among males and middle-aged individuals, and fentanyl was present in a
significant proportion of those deaths.
Nearly 88% of opioid-involved overdose deaths involved synthetic opioids (e.g., fentanyl and analogues)
while in Canada 86% of opioid-involved overdose deaths involved fentanyl and 20% involved fentanyl
analogues (note: due to data limitations, a death involving fentanyl could also involve a fentanyl
analogue).
Indigenous Peoples
Across Canada, Indigenous Peoples are overrepresented in terms of substance-related deaths.
Example: In B.C. from January to June 2023, First Nations people died at 6.0 times the rate of other B.C.
residents.
Example: In Saskatchewan, from January 1 to December 4, 2023, almost twice as many First Nations
females (40) died from accidental deaths involving opioids than Caucasian females (25).
Example: In Alberta, while First Nations people only make up 6% of the population, they represent 22%
of all opioid poisoning deaths from January to June 2020.
Substance Use & Women
Between 2016-2022 – women made up 26-30% of all opioid related deaths, and 38-50% of opioid-
related hospitalizations.
2022 – First Nations women died at 11.2X the rate of non-Indigenous women from an overdose.
Between September and December 2020, 16.2% of women self-reported an increase in their alcohol
consumption.
2018-19 – 18% of high school female students reported cannabis use
Safer Supply Projects
As of December 2023:
There are 29 federally-funded projects currently active, 24 of which provide direct service delivery.
Active sites serve approximately 4,300 clients in 3 provinces (B.C., Ontario, and New Brunswick). QC
receives funding that they manage for safer supply projects.
Since 2018, HC has supported 31 projects through SUAP with total funding commitment of over $102
million
Supervised Consumption Sites (SCS)
There are currently 39 SCS offering services in Canada
Between October 2017 and September 2023 at SCS in Canada:
There were over 4.4 million visits
There were at least 389,000 unique clients
Over 52,000 overdoses were attended to
Staff made over 411,000 referrals to health and social services
Naloxone Training and Distribution
SUAP-funded naloxone projects have resulted in:
the training of more than 1.5 million Canadians on how to respond to an overdose, including 153,730
trained on how to administer naloxone
more than 69,000 nasal naloxone kits distributed across Canada (as of May 2023).
Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP)
Since 2017, over $565M was committed for nearly 390 projects through SUAP to address the overdose
crisis, and substance use overall.
Currently, the program is supporting approximately 250 innovative harm reduction, treatment and
prevention projects were funded that meet the needs of disproportionately impacted populations at the
community-level.
Funding is over $135 million in 2023-24.
Supporting a broad range of substances and priorities, including projects supporting naloxone
awareness/training/distribution, testing evidence-based treatment programs, including expansion rapid
access addiction medicine clinics, prescriber-based safer supply pilots, development of evidence-based
treatment guidelines, the implementation of peer led programs and peer support workers, smoking
cessation programs, and expanded access to drug checking services.
Good geographic spread spanning from Atlantic to Western Canada, including limited but growing
representation in the North.
As of March 31, 2023, SUAP-funded projects have created a total of:
6,619 knowledge products including pamphlets, publications, knowledge hubs, training curriculums,
guidelines, apps, and toolkits;
64,437 learning opportunities including training sessions, conferences, webinars, and communities of
practice; and,
2,860 new services including harm reduction, counselling, treatment, safer supply, and drug checking.
Active Projects – Breakdown (as of October 2023)
There are currently 248 active SUAP projects across the country, representing $339M in federal funding.
The breakdown of active projects by PT is as follows:
AB: 18 BC: 67 MB: 17 NB: 4 NL: 9 NS: 11 NT: 2 NU: 1 ON: 105 PEI: 2 QC: 2* SK: 6
YK: 4
The Province of Quebec receives SUAP funding on a per-capita basis (approximately 22.5% of SUAP
contribution funding). Funding is administered through contribution agreements with the Ministère de la
Santé et des Services sociaux.
Active SUAP projects that focus on the following pillars:
Harm reduction: 144
Treatment: 41
•Prevention: 31
Multiple Pillars: 32
Active SUAP projects include projects that focus on the following priority populations:
Indigenous led and/or focused: 50
Youth-focused: 18
2SLGBTQIA+-focused: 3
Active SUAP projects that target the following substances:
Opioids: 83
Alcohol: 5
Tobacco: 4
Cannabis: 6
Methamphetamine: 11
Polysubstance: 139
Declarations of Emergency
Numerous jurisdictions (provinces and territories, municipalities and First Nations) across British
Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, and Yukon have made various emergency
declarations with regards to the overdose crisis, substance use, mental health and/or homelessness.
P/T Declarations:
British Columbia – Public Health Emergency – April 2016
Alberta – Public Health Crisis – May 2017
Yukon – Call to Action (Substance Use Health Emergency) – January 2022
Since 2020, more than 34 communities across Canada have publicly announced crises or emergencies
Federal Funding
General Overview:
Overdose Crisis – since 2017, investments of over $1B (including $359.2M in Budget 2023)
The Government of Canada will increase PT funding by $200B over 10 years (including $25B for shared
health priorities).
The $200B is on top of 2017 PT bilateral agreements which includes $5B over 10 years for Mental Health
and Addictions services.
Regular Support to PTs via Canada Health Transfers
CHT – $49.4B (an increase of 9.3%) (2023-2024)
$11B to QC
Bilateral Agreement Funding Included in Working Together Plan
$25B over 10 years (Budget 2023) to support family health services, health workers and backlogs, mental
health and substance use, and a modernized data system through tailored bilateral agreements.
Collectively, within PT action plans, 34.6% ($2,558M) of the overall Working Together funding is being
targeted towards mental health and substance use initiatives (one of four pillars).
As per the 2017 CSOP funding: the largest total investments in MHSU initiatives are BC ($246M), AB
($426M), and ON ($1.5B). PE is the only PT that has allocated less than 10% of combined CSOP and new
funding for MHSU ($7.8M).
The largest total investments in MHSU initiatives are BC (20.2%; $1,200M), AB (39.8%;
$1,070M), and ON (47.8; $3,190M). PE is the only PT that has allocated less than 10% for MHSU ($7.8M).
Although AB, SK, and MB have proposed a more recovery-oriented approach, with all three provinces
prioritizing the expansion and/or optimization of existing addiction treatment spaces and recovery
communities, PTs have overall adopted an integrated posture with respect to MHSU. It is therefore
challenging with currently available information to disaggregate PT funding allocations for mental health
from substance use.
Research Funding:
Over the last five years, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested $90.6 million on
opioid research, which includes funding to the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse
(CRISM), a pan-Canadian research network that seeks to identify and develop clinical and community-
based interventions for substance use disorders.
Other Bilateral Agreement Support:
Emergency Treatment Fund – $150M for 5 years (Budget 2018). The ETF provides support to PTs to help
address the opioid crisis.
Mental Health and Substance Use in Canada
50% of people with schizophrenia also have a substance use disorder
50% of those in substance use treatment live with mental illness
many of hospitalizations related to opioid use disorder and opioid overdose include co- diagnosis of
another mental health disorder (56% and 43%, respectively)
Population Mental Health
2022 - 53% of Canadians rated their mental health as “Excellent or very good”, down from 2021 (59%)
Nearly 1 in 5 Canadians reported a need for mental health care in 2020.
45% of those who had a need reported that their needs were either unmet or only partially met.
People with a mental illness are 2X as likely to have a substance use disorder
At least 20% of people with a mental illness having a co-occurring substance use disorder..
Indigenous Mental Health
2021 – only 51% of Indigenous Peoples in Canada reported excellent or very good mental health,
compared to 59% of white Canadians, and 62% of racialized non-Indigenous individuals.
2021 – Over 1 in 4 Indigenous Peoples (27%) reported having an anxiety or mood disorder, compared to
17% of white individuals, and 6% of racialized non-Indigenous individuals.
2020 – 13% of Indigenous Peoples had unmet needs for mental health care, compared to 8% of white
individuals, and 7% of racialized non-Indigenous individuals.
2019 Stats Canada Report – the suicide rate (2011-2016) among First Nations people (24.3 deaths per
100,000) was three times higher than the rate among non-Indigenous people (8.0 deaths per 100,000).
Indigenous Peoples represent 39% of shelter users, but comprise 5% of the Canadian population.
Standards for Mental Health & Substance Use (MHSU)
March 2022 - HC partnered with the Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to coordinate the development
of standards and related deliverables.
The 6 priority areas include:
Integration of MHSU in Primary Care;
Digital MHSU Apps;
IYS;
Integrated MHSU Services for Complex Needs;
Substance Use Treatment Centres – Withdrawal Management; and
Substance Use Workforce – Prescriber Competencies for Non-Addictions Providers
Integrated Youth Services (IYS)
Budget 2023 funding through tailored bilateral agreements and ongoing Budget 2017 funding for mental
health and substance use is supporting the expansion of IYS.
As of 2023, there are 91 active IYS sites in Canada, and another 48 under development.
PART C: SUPPLEMENTAL
(34) Scenario Note
SCENARIO NOTE
MINISTER SAKS
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (HESA) – OPIOID EPIDEMIC AND TOXIC
DRUG CRISIS
February 1, 2024
MEETING SCENARIO
The Standing Committee on Health initiated a study on the Opioid Epidemic and Toxic Drug Crisis in
Canada in Fall 2023.
On December 4, 2023, the Committee adopted a motion to invite the Minister of Mental Health and
Addictions and Associate Minister of Health to appear before the Committee. The terms of the motion
limit the appearance to a one hour meeting occurring no later than Friday, February 2, 2024.
At the meeting, you will be supported by the following officials:
Health Canada
Dr. Stephen Lucas, Deputy Minister
Eric Costen, Associate Deputy Minister
Jennifer Saxe, Associate Assistant Deputy Minister, Controlled Substances and Cannabis Branch
Public Health Agency of Canada
Nancy Hamzawi, Executive Vice President
Dr. Theresa Tam, Chief Public Health Officer
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
Dr. Samuel Weiss, Scientific Director, Institute of Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction
The Committee meeting will begin with your opening remarks, which you will have 5 minutes to deliver.
You will then take questions from Committee members for the remainder of the hour.
The first round of questions is generally 6 minutes in length and is asked in the following order:
Conservative Party (CPC), Liberal Party (LPC), Bloc Québécois (BQ), and New Democratic Party (NDP).
In the second and subsequent round(s), the order and time of questioning is as follows: Conservative
Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes), Bloc Québécois (2.5 minutes), NDP (2.5 minutes),
Conservative Party (5 minutes), and Liberal Party (5 minutes).
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
The Committee is conducting the following seven studies concurrently:
Opioid Epidemic and Toxic Drug Crisis in Canada
Women’s Health
Government’s Advanced Purchase Agreement for Vaccines with Medicago
Natural Health Products
Children’s Health (drafting a report)
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (drafting a report)
National Three-Digit Suicide Prevention Hotline (no meetings, presumed defunct)
The most recent ministerial appearance at the Health Committee was on November 1, 2023, where you
were called to discuss mandate letter commitments. The main issues raised at this meeting included
mental health services, substance use and harm reduction, decriminalization of controlled substances,
safer supply and the alleged diversion of controlled substances in British Columbia, and fentanyl.
Departmental officials appeared before the Committee on December 4, 2023, to begin the Committee’s
study on the Opioid Epidemic and Toxic Drug Crisis in Canada. The key topics that were raised at this
meeting were opioid overdose deaths, safer supply and its alleged diversion in British Columbia,
decriminalization of controlled substances, harm reduction and supervised consumption sites, and
fentanyl.
The Opposition role at the Committee is led by the Conservative Party, who have placed several key
critics (i.e., “shadow ministers”) on the Committee. Dr. Stephen Ellis is the Shadow Minister for Health,
and Todd Doherty is the Shadow Minister for Mental Health and Suicide Prevention. At recent meetings,
CPC Committee members have raised concerns about supervised consumption sites and the provision of
a safer supply of controlled substances, linking it to generalized concerns about decriminalization and
overdose related deaths. On December 4, 2023, Dr. Ellis, Mr. Doherty, and Shuvaloy Majumdar all
inquired after a new subset of the population who in their view previously did not use substances but
now do. They critically associated safer supply with contributing not only to diversion, but to new
substance use dependencies altogether, suggesting that hydromorphone is now being distributed in high
schools. CPC members have also characterized the 2.5g limit for the possession of controlled substances
in British Columbia as arbitrary and have questioned the potency of the substances available on the illicit
market, as well as how many grams of naloxone (Narcan) is typically available. On November 1, 2023, Mr.
Doherty asked for updates on the proposed Canada Mental Health Transfer and about provincial
accountability to the federal government with respect to the Substance Use and Addictions Program
(SUAP). CPC members have commented on what they view as a lack of adequate metrics by which to
evaluate the success of SUAP and decriminalization efforts in British Columbia. Other issues that have
been raised include whether substance use is an irremediable condition that could render a patient
eligible for medical assistance in dying (MAID) and timely access to recovery services, particularly as an
alternative to the current harm reduction approach.
The New Democratic Party (NDP) presence is led by Don Davies, the Party’s Health Critic and long-
standing member of the Committee. NDP Mental Health and Harms Reduction critic, Gord Johns, often
attends meetings when the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions appears. When the former
Minister went in March to discuss the Supplementary Estimates (C), Main Estimates, and Departmental
Plans, Mr. Johns commented critically about government progress on decriminalization and criticized the
amount spent on SUAP. Mr. Johns also asked several questions then and in meetings since about mental
health funding, services for substance users, and safer supply. On December 4, 2023, Mr. Johns
compared Canada’s response to the toxic drug crisis and the opioid overdose epidemic to the approach
taken in Portugal, characterizing Canada’s response as inadequate because no public health emergency
has been declared. NDP members have also expressed dissatisfaction with incremental policies,
characterizing them as too slow of a response to the toxic substance problem. Mr. Johns and Mr. Davies
have often inquired after bilateral agreement funding, Mental Health Transfers, and have advocated for
more SUAP funding. De-stigmatization and more immediate safer supply of substances have been
repeatedly suggested by NDP members as critical parts of the solution to the opioid epidemic.
The Bloc Québécois (BQ) presence is led by BQ Health Critic, Luc Thériault. In general, the BQ advocates
for strong protection of matters under provincial jurisdiction and increased federal health transfers. BQ
MPs have repeatedly emphasized a general skepticism about the ability of the Federal Government to
deliver programs that may be similar to those already existing in Quebec. On December 4, Mr. Thériault
suggested improving access to prescription drugs as a partial solution to the toxic substances Canadians
are obtaining illicitly. Mr. Theriault expressed his interest in discussing the kind and quantity of drugs that
can be prescribed for those who wish to stop using substances. He has also inquired about Canadian law
enforcement and border control measures for substances coming into the country, pointing to areas
that, in his view, needed improvement. On November 1, 2023, Mr. Thériault asked about what he
characterized as Quebec’s exclusion from provincial and territorial mental health transfers, commenting
that Quebec has long had its own mental health care systems in place that would continue to serve the
province well. On occasion this member has asked whether substance use is an irremediable condition
that could render a patient eligible for MAID, either on its own, or in a complex needs context.
NEXT STEPS
The Department endeavours to respond to any follow-up commitments made at the meeting within 2-3
weeks of the appearance.
The most recent meetings of the Committee have been concerning its studies on the Opioid Epidemic
and Toxic Drug Crisis in Canada, the Government’s Advanced Purchase Agreement for Vaccines with
Medicago, and Women’s Health. It is expected that the Committee will continue meeting on these
studies into the spring.
(35) Follow-up from December 4, 2023 Officials Appearance (Draft)
Question
Mr. Luc Thériault: Thank you, Mr. Chair.
In 2016, at hearings of the committee, Dr. Bonnie Henry, the provincial health officer for British
Columbia, said that detoxification programs for users of opioids were not working, because the
physiological dependence created by opioids required opioid substitution therapy, based on products
like Suboxone. There was also discussion of Vivitrol at the hearings.
All of that led to recommendation 21 in a committee report, which I believe was adopted unanimously.
The recommendation reads as follows:
That the Government of Canada improve access to medications for opioid addiction treatment such as
Suboxone® and other effective medications not currently available in Canada, especially for people at
high risk of complication and death.
In British Columbia, do you have data on the number of substitution therapies, access to these
substitution therapies, and their efficacy in terms of medium-term recovery?
Ms. Jennifer Saxe: I don't have the specific data for British Columbia.
Mr. Luc Thériault: Could you possibly send them to us?
Response
For people with opioid use disorder (OUD), abruptly stopping the use of opioids without medical support
is not an effective nor safe treatment. The Government of Canada believes that substance use is a health
issue and that improved access to treatment services can help those struggling with substance use and
save lives.
To help provide compassionate, comprehensive and collaborative care for people who are ready to enter
treatment for substance use disorder, the Government supports range of actions, including:
Evidence-based treatment options;
Improvements to treatment systems, programs and services; and
Working with others and sharing knowledge about new approaches to treatment and recovery.
Opioid agonist therapy (OAT), sometimes medication-assisted treatment, is a medical treatment for
people with OUD. These medications reduce cravings for opioids and prevent severe withdrawal
symptoms. With opioid agonist therapy, long-acting opioid medications are given under the supervision
of a health care provider.
There are currently various OAT options approved for use in Canada, including buprenorphine (including
Suboxone and Sublocade), methadone, slow-release oral morphine and injectable opioid agonist
treatments.
Provinces and territories are primarily responsible for the delivery of health services, including treatment
services. Provinces and territories are also responsible for decisions regarding which approved
medications are made available on drug formularies within their respective jurisdictions. Given the range
of treatment approaches across regions, the availability of data on the number and type of medications
prescribed for people with OUD varies by province and territory.
With respect to British Columbia (B.C.), data on OAT dispensation is made available through an online
dashboard from the BC Centre for Disease Control (BCCDC). Specifically, this dashboard reports on the
number of clients dispensed OAT in the province at community pharmacies, and the number of OAT
prescribers. The data indicate that:
The number of clients dispensed OAT (any kind) in B.C. increased between 2015 and 2021. Since late
2021, the number of clients dispensed OAT has remained relatively stable (fluctuating between ~24,000
to 25,000 per month)
The number of OAT prescribers in B.C. has also generally increased over time since 2015. In October
2023, there were 2,114 OAT prescribers in the province.
In September 2023, the B.C. Ministry of Mental Health and Addictions (MMHA) released a data snapshot
providing a point-in-time overview of progress towards building an integrated and seamless system of
care (‘Mental Health and Substance Use System of Care’). Data is from a variety of sources, including the
MMHA, the B.C. Ministry of Health, the BCCDC, regional health authorities, and First Nations Health
Authority and government partners. Other provinces/territories that have substance use data tools
publicly available include (but may not be limited to): Alberta, Manitoba, and Ontario, Not all provide
data on OAT.
At the federal level, we have taken a number of regulatory actions to help improve access to medications
used in substance use treatment programs across the country, including:
issuing a class exemption (an exemption authorized to a group of people, such as pharmacists, to
conduct specific activities with controlled substances) to make it easier for patients to access the
medications they need;
approving injectable hydromorphone as a treatment option for patients with severe opioid use disorder;
approving injectable diacetylmorphine as a new treatment option for patients with severe opioid use
disorder; as well facilitating the prescribing and dispensing of methadone and diacetylmorphine; and
authorizing nurses who provide health care services at a community health facility to conduct certain
activities with controlled substances.
In addition, through the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), Health Canada is funding 8
projects in the Province of B.C. that offer treatments options such as OAT.
For example, Health Canada is funding the University of British Columbia for its Preventing Overdose
Deaths by Providing Buprenorphine/Naloxone to High Risk Emergency Department Patients project
which is expanding access to buprenorphine/naloxone for people with opioid use disorders who present
to Emergency Departments (ED) with a variety of clinical presentations.
To assist health care practitioners, service providers, and decision makers address the urgent needs of
people who use substances, the Government of Canada is funding the Canadian Research Initiative in
Substance Misuse (CRISM). CRISM has developed national guidelines on effective approaches for the
treatment of opioid use disorders, including a National Guideline for the Clinical Management of Opioid
Use Disorder (2018), a National Injectable Opioid Agonist Treatment (iOAT) Guideline (2019), and a series
of six national guidance documents to address urgent needs of people who use drugs, services providers,
and decision-makers during the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to work with CRISM experts, people
with lived and living experience, provinces and territories, as well as other key stakeholders to
disseminate best practices reflected in these guidelines, so that they can be widely adopted.
We are also providing significant funding to provinces and territories to improve healthcare systems
across Canada. On February 7, 2023, the Government of Canada announced it will increase health
funding to provinces and territories by nearly $200 billion over 10 years. This investment includes $25
billion for shared health priorities, including increasing access to mental health and substance use
services and supports.
On October 10, 2023, the Government of Canada and Province of B.C. announced a bilateral agreement
of more than $1.2 billion over the next three years, marking a crucial step in a 10-year plan for
collaboration. This includes $82 million per year in previously-announced mental health and substance
use funding, which will help accelerate efforts already underway in British Columbia to improve health
care access and services.
These commitments are in addition to funding provided through the Emergency Treatment Fund (ETF) in
2018, and existing bilateral agreements with provinces and territories for health priorities, including
mental health and substance use, that were put in place in 2017 and will set the foundation for long-
term, integrated and sustained health care system change that builds on existing, targeted actions to
address mental health and substance use challenges, including improved access to evidence-based
treatment.
In B.C., funding provided through the ETF was directed towards programs that build on existing
telehealth infrastructure in order to support OAT in rural/remote communities. Support was also
provided to Foundry BC, integrated service centres for youth, to accelerate the launch of their virtual
service offerings for primary care, mental health, substance use, and peer support via voice, video, and
chat. Resources have also been invested in attracting and enhancing the capacity of new addictions care
providers. This includes providing training, mentoring and fellowship education opportunities to new and
existing primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, nurses and social workers throughout the province.
The B.C. Ministry of Health and Ministry of Mental Health and Addictions have a 3-year agreement with
the BC Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU) that utilizes ETF funding across four initiatives to increase
treatment capacity. Results for 2021/22 include: increased OAT prescribers in 28 of the province’s least
served local health areas; expanded OAT preceptor network with preceptors located in all Health Service
Delivery Areas; 24/7 provincial telephone line to support OAT healthcare providers in treating OUD was
expanded to include physicians, registered nurses, and registered nurse practitioners, pharmacists and
midwives and non-clinical addictions workers in First Nations’ Communities.
The items above are some examples of concrete actions taken by the federal government to address the
overdose crisis. Please visit the following website for a comprehensive list of all the actions taken to
date.
(36) Status of Recommendations from the 2016 HESA Study on the Opioid Crisis in Canada
The House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) undertook a study on the opioid crisis in
Canada through several meetings in October 2016. The Committee heard from witnesses about the
origins of the crisis in Canada, the federal, provincial, and territorial responses to the crisis at that time,
and possible actions to respond to the crisis across themes such as health care provider training, public
education, expanded access to treatment and mental health supports, and access to data.
The Committee developed 38 recommendations implicating the federal government, as well as
provinces, territories, regulatory colleges, and another Parliamentary Committee. Of the 38
recommendations, 35 were within the purview of the federal government, with the vast majority (21/35)
requiring collaboration with other jurisdictions, including Indigenous communities.
Per information currently available to Health Canada, nearly all of the recommendations directed at the
federal government have been completed or have been partially met. The remaining require
consultation with other departments (e.g., ISC) or have been given consideration and a decision taken
that the recommendation was not an appropriate mechanism to address the crisis (e.g., declaring a
public health emergency).
The crisis has evolved significantly over the last eight years, as have the actions needed to address it. We
continue to consider advice of stakeholders, and other experts, to respond effectively and thoughtfully to
the crisis as it exists today.
Status # HESA 2016 Recommendations Comments
1 Declare the opioid overdose crisis a national public health emergency Responsive lines
available in HESA binder
X 2 Create a national multi-sectoral taskforce on the opioid crisis Met via the DM Task
Force on the Opioid Overdose Crisis and the CDSS, which includes representatives from across
government, and the Expert Task Force on Substance Use, which included representatives from multiple
sectors (including health, justice/public safety, academia, PWLLE, and community perspectives.
X 3 Work with provincial and territorial counterparts to immediately develop an ongoing
and fully coordinated pan-Canadian surveillance system for drug overdoses PHAC quarterly
reporting
4 Reinstate “harm reduction” as a core pillar of the National Anti-Drug Strategy, and also define
“harm reduction". Included in the 2016 CDSS and part of the Services and Supports foundational
element of renewed CDSS in 2023.
X 5 Work with the provinces and territories to establish a network of harm reduction
facilities Through SUAP, funded the Dr. Peter Centre to create a Community of Practice and an Operators
HUB.
X 6 Work with provinces/territories, and first responders’ regulatory authorities, to ensure
that first responders, individuals who use drugs and others have access to naloxone and appropriate
training on how to use it. Health Canada has increased access to naloxone by making naloxone
available without a prescription (2016), passing the Good Samaritan Drug Overdose Act (2017), provided
over $26M in funding to increase naloxone distribution and training across Canada (2021), and
continued engagement of PTs and key stakeholders (e.g., funding of naloxone best practice guideline,
2023).
7 First Nations and Inuit Health Branch of Health Canada ensure that adequate supplies of
naloxone and appropriate training on its use are available in reserve communities. Naloxone should be
included in the safer injection kits provided on reserve by Health Canada nurses in First Nations, Inuit
and Métis communities. In 2018, added nasal naloxone to the Non-Insured Health Benefits program, First
Nations & Inuit Health. Nasal naloxone is distributed through nursing stations. Since January 2023 alone,
approximately $2.55M was spent to purchase naloxone.
8 Repeal or significantly amend the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act where it creates barriers
to communities in establishing supervised consumption sites, and in the interim, work with communities
and organizations to overcome administrative hurdles in relation to seeking exemptions under the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act in relation to supervised consumption sites. Completed via
Bill C-37 (received Royal Assent on May 18, 2017), which streamlined and simplified the application
process for communities who wish to open supervised consumption sites, while ensuring that
community consultation continues to be an integral part of the process. HC also issued class exemptions
to all PTs to enable them to establish urgent public heath need sites as required within their province or
territory.
9 Grant exemptions under the CDSA for the purposes of drug testing at SCS Completed
10 Medical regulatory agencies in Canada work with their respective memberships to develop
information and training tools relating to recognizing addiction, making appropriate referrals to
evidence-based treatment programs and treating PWUD with respect Responsibility of regulatory
colleges; however, CIHR has funded development of toolkits on equity-oriented healthcare and Health
Canada has provided funding via the Emergency Treatment Fund to support the development of tools
and approaches such as emergency room protocols and Hub and Spoke models to support practitioners
in treating patients with substance use disorder
11 Appropriate regulatory agencies develop a review system in relation to prescribing practices of
physicians and pharmacists. Responsibility of regulatory colleges.
X 12 That the new opioid prescribing guidelines be expedited, and that the Government of
Canada work with the provinces and territories to encourage provincial licensing bodies to mandate
their adoption. Funding was provided by Health Canada and CIHR to McMaster University researchers to
update 2010 guidelines. The revised 2017 Canadian Guideline for Opioids for Chronic Non-Cancer Pain
was published in the Canadian Medical Association Journal (CMAJ) on May 8, 2017; however, adoption is
beyond jurisdiction of the federal government.
X 13 Work with PTs to facilitate a broader approach to reducing opiate prescribing and
integrate alternatives for pain management. Ongoing efforts by Health Canada to support
implementation of the recommendations of the Canadian Pain Task Force and ensure that actions
recognize the needs of people living with chronic pain, including holding a Best Brains Exchange on
Treatment of Chronic Pain and Complex Concurrent Mental Health and Substance Use Conditions.
14 Health Canada review and revise if necessary its approved indications for opioids to reflect peer-
reviewed data Completed – Health Canada regularly updates product monographs and labelling for
prescription opioids, including labelling changes in 2018 and 2019
X 15 Work with PTs to establish a comprehensive, real-time, national electronic prescription
monitoring system. Prescription monitoring programs are administered at the PT level. Health
Canada convened an FPT working group to help PTs establish their programs.
X 16 Work with the provinces and territories to develop public awareness tools in relation to
the risks associated with opioid use, and how to respond to overdoses. Health Canada regularly
undertakes public education campaigns and efforts on this issue (e.g., Know More, Ease the Burden).
Health Canada also collaborates with PTs through FPT committees and working groups (e.g., FPT
Committee on Substance Use) to share best practices, including public awareness tools.
X 17 Government of Canada invest significant new funding to expand treatment for
addictions Funding for substance use treatment services provided under the: 2018 Emergency
Treatment Fund; 2017 Bilateral Agreements on Mental Health and Addictions; 2023 Working Together
Bilateral Agreements
X 18 Work with the PTs to significantly increase the availability of community-based, publicly
funded substance abuse treatment programs. Collaboration with PTs through FPT committees and
working groups to share best practices on providing substance use services; Funding for substance use
treatment services provided under the: 2018 Emergency Treatment Fund; 2017 Bilateral Agreements on
Mental Health and Addictions; 2023 Working Together Bilateral Agreements.
X 19 Work with the PTs to strengthen existing detoxification treatment programs and create
new ones. Collaboration with PTs through FPT committees and working groups to share best
practices on providing substance use services;
Funding for substance use treatment services provided under the 2018 Emergency Treatment Fund,
2017 Bilateral Agreements on Mental Health and Addictions, 2023 Working Together Bilateral
Agreements Health Canada is working in collaboration with PTs, to help develop national standards
deliverables, including on substance use withdrawal management.
X 20 Work with the PTs and their medical regulatory authorities to develop effective clinical
practice guidelines relating to addiction treatment GC has funded the development of numerous
guidelines; for example, the 2017 Canadian Guideline for Opioids for Chronic Non-Cancer Pain; CRISM
guidelines for the Clinical Management of Opioid Use Disorder and Injectable OAT.
X 21 Improve access to medications for opioid addiction treatment such as Suboxone® and
other effective medications not currently available in Canada, especially for people at high risk of
complication and death. Completed - In addition to existing mechanisms, regulations amended in June
2017 to enable importation of drugs for an urgent public health need; Health Canada also removed
barriers to accessing drugs used for the treatment of opioid use disorder by:
Issuing a class exemption for patients,practitioners, and pharmacists prescribing and providing
controlled substances in Canada to ensure continuity of care
Approving injectable hydromorphone and diacetylmorphine as treatment options for patients with
severe opioid use disorder
Facilitating the prescribing and dispensing of methadone and diacetylmorphine through regulatory
amendments
22 Consult with First Nations and Inuit communities to ensure that culturally appropriate care and
assistance for addictions are available on reserve Consultation with ISC on status underway.
X 23 Work with the PTs to ensure that culturally appropriate care and assistance for
addictions is available to Indigenous individuals off reserve Collaboration with PTs through FPT
committees and working groups to share best practices on providing substance use services; Funding for
substance use treatment services provided under the 2018 Emergency Treatment Fund, 2017 Bilateral
Agreements on Mental Health and Addictions, 2023 Working Together Bilateral Agreements.
X 24 Ensure that working with Indigenous communities to address the opioid crisis is carried
out in the context of addressing the recommendations made by the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission of Canada and the social determinants of health such as adequate housing, education, and
access to health services including mental health services. Consultation with ISC on status
underway.
25 Increase funding to First Nations communities to allow for multi-year health and social service
provider contracts and appropriate accountability and transparency measures. Consultation with ISC
on status underway.
26 Commit to providing stable needs-based funding for First Nations in order for them to
implement the First Nations Mental Wellness Continuum Framework. Consultation with ISC on status
underway.
X 27 Eliminate its current time restrictions on the scopes of practice of nurses relating to
treating addiction on reserve Consultation with ISC on status underway.
X 28 Provide a full and adequately funded continuum of services for Indigenous Canadians
that includes longterm funding for community-based prescription drug abuse programs, such as opioid
substitution therapy with Suboxone®, along with land-based treatment and other cultural therapies
Consultation with ISC on status underway.
X 29 Work with the PTs to ensure treatment for active drug users is available to address the
underlying mental health issues that may contribute to or exacerbate drug addiction Collaboration
with PTs through FPT committees and working groups to share best practices on providing mental health
and substance use services; Funding for substance use treatment services provided under the 2018
Emergency Treatment Fund, 2017 Bilateral Agreements on Mental Health and Addictions, 2023 Working
Together Bilateral Agreements.
X 30 Work with the PTs to develop a national strategy to provide better training and mental
health services for front-line workers and first responders Ongoing effort and funding provided to
address mental health of health workers; in December 2023, Minister Holland announced $3.5M over 5
years to the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada to develop a National Plan for Health
Workforce Well- Being to improve health workforce retention; $50M through Budget 2021 to support
those experiencing PTSD due to the pandemic, including frontline and essential service providers;
Budget 2018 committed $20M over five years to support a joint initiative between CIHR and the
Canadian Institute for Public Safety Research and Treatment to address post-traumatic stress injuries
among public safety personnel.
X 31 Work with the PTs to compile information relating to fatal and non-fatal overdoses due
to opioid use and that this information be reported by the Public Health Agency of Canada in a timely
manner PHAC quarterly reporting
X 32 Work with the PTs to establish provincial/territorial and municipal support services that
will allow for the monitoring and surveillance of drug use patterns to better facilitate treatment
strategies on a national scale Various PHAC, StatsCan, and Health Canada data initiatives are aligned
with this recommendation (e.g. DAS (Drug Analysis Services) drug checking data and reports, wastewater
surveillance).
33 Grant authority and lawful privilege to Canada Border Services Agency officials to search and/or
test suspect packages that weigh under 30 grams. Completed via Bill C-37 (received Royal Assent
on May 18, 2017), which amended the Customs Act to remove the exception that prevents border
officers from opening mail weighing 30 grams or less, in order to stop drugs, like fentanyl, from entering
Canada illicitly through the mail system.
PS 34 Develop a federal enforcement and interdiction strategy around the importation of illicit
opioids. In addition to enforcement activities in 2016 Canadian Drugs and Substance Strategy, the
renewed Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy released in 2023 includes activities on enforcement
and preventing cross-border movement of illegal drugs and precursor chemicals. The GC is also active in
a variety of international forums to address this issue.
35 Adopt measures to regulate commercial pill presses to limit their possession to pharmacists and
others who hold an appropriate licence Completed via Bill C-37 (received Royal Assent on May 18,
2017), which prohibited unregistered importation of designated devices that may be used in the illicit
manufacture of controlled substances, such as pill presses and encapsulators.
36 Stronger criminal penalties for having a production machine be established Completed via
Bill C-37, (received Royal Assent on May 18, 2017), which prohibited unregistered importation of
designated devices that may be used in the illicit manufacture of controlled substances, such as pill
presses and encapsulators.
PS 37 Provide more resources for drug testing packages and other shipments $31.6M in
Budget 2018
38 Standing Committee on Public Safety and National Security undertake a study into the primary
source for illicit opioids in Canada to determine the risk to public safety and evaluate the current
methods and relationships to determine if Canada can be more successful at stemming the flow of illicit
opioids into Canada Government of Canada cannot direct Parliamentary Committees
(37) Summary of articles related to risk mitigation guidance for safer supply
i) Summary of Article Published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) looking
at hospitalizations in BC after the introduction of risk mitigation prescribing
Article: British Columbia’s Safer Opioid Supply Policy and Opioid Outcomes
Summary:
Published in JAMA on January 16, 2024, this article looks at changes in opioid prescribing and opioid
poisoning hospitalizations at the provincial level in BC, both before and after the introduction of risk
mitigation guidance prescribing (RMG), and compared to two other provinces: Manitoba and
Saskatchewan.
These provinces were chosen due to data availability.
The authors compare BC to other provinces to see if all three had similar changes in outcomes over time,
or if BC had particularly large changes in these outcomes after the RMG guidance was released. This is
one way to look at the impacts of a policy on outcomes when you don’t have client-level data – by
comparing overall outcomes in one place to outcomes in places that did not implement the policy.
They found significant increases in rates of opioid prescribing in BC after the implementation of RMG
prescribing, relative to Manitoba and Saskatchewan (they looked at hydromorphone, morphine,
fentanyl, and oxycodone).
They also found significant increases in the rate of hospitalization for opioid- related poisonings after the
implementation of RMG prescribing, relative to Manitoba and Saskatchewan
The increases in fatal overdose were not significantly different between the three provinces.
Importantly, due to data availability, the authors could not specifically look at prescription increases or
hospitalizations that were directly linked to safer supply prescriptions – instead, they looked at trends in
prescribing for any indication (including pain) and hospitalizations for any opioid poisoning (including
illegal fentanyl).
It is also important that this kind of association does not mean safer supply caused increased
hospitalizations. It is possible that the increased hospitalizations were driven by unmeasured factors that
happened at the same time in BC but not other provinces, like the increased volatility of the toxic drug
supply in Western Canada or the BC housing crisis. It is even possible that the scale-up of RMG
implementation was in response to increased drug-related harms (the causation is reversed).
Finally, recent research has shown that RMG prescribing only reached 7.6% of the population of people
with OUD in BC, and an even smaller fraction of those at risk for overdose related hospitalizations. This
research also showed no increase in hospitalizations among 5,356 people who received RMG
prescriptions.
The authors hypothesize that RMG prescribing could be a driver of harm among non- clients through
access to diverted prescriptions. There is data from BC showing that rates of new OUD diagnoses have
been stable or declining across all age groups since 2017, and that hydromorphone prescribing has not
contributed to an increase in deaths. However, the effects of increased access to prescription opioids on
other populations (for example, people who are in recovery or people who are already using illegal
opioids) remains unknown.
Overall, this article points to the need for more research around the extend and outcomes of
prescription medication diversion, to ensure that there are no unanticipated harms from the provincial
safer supply policy. The article does not in itself constitute direct evidence of harms from diversion.
ii) Summary of Article Published in the British Medical Journal looking at outcomes and mortality
rates among clients who accessed opioid prescriptions through BC’s
Risk Mitigation Prescribing
Article: Effect of Risk Mitigation Guidance opioid and stimulant dispensations on mortality and acute
care visits during dual public health emergencies: retrospective cohort study
This is the first large-scale quantitative study of outcomes from risk mitigation prescribing in BC, and is
now by far the strongest evidence to date of the positive effects of safer supply on mortality risk among
people with opioid use disorder.
Summary:
The study looked at outcomes from 5,356 people with opioid use disorder who accessed opioid
prescriptions through BC’s risk mitigation guidance (RMG) between March 2020 and August 2021.
BC’s RMG focused on prescribing hydromorphone and oral morphine as pharmaceutical alternatives to
the illegal drug supply, in the context of the pandemic.
Note: In July 2021, BC subsequently introduced its "Prescribed Safer Supply Policy Direction" ("PSS") as
an enabling document to support the provision of safer supply prescribing across the province beyond
the pandemic context and formalizing how services would be delivered. An evaluation of PSS is currently
underway.
Access to RMG opioids was linked to lower overdose-related and all cause mortality in the week after
receiving the prescription compared to a control group of similar people with opioid use disorder who
did not access RMG opioids.
RMG opioids can only protect clients from the toxic supply while they are still using them, so the
researchers looked at overdose rates in the following week to make sure they captured the short-term
effects of receiving RMG opioids.
RMG opioid prescribing was even more effective when clients accessed it more often. Receiving RMG
opioids on four or more days in a week led to 89% fewer overdose deaths the following week compared
to the control group, but receiving RMG opioids on only one or more days led to 47% fewer overdose
deaths.
The study also looked at outcomes among 1,061 people with stimulant use disorder who accessed
prescription stimulants under the RMG.
Lower mortality was not seen among people receiving RMG stimulants, but since there were fewer
people in this group, changes in mortality would be harder to detect
Those receiving RMG stimulants had lower odds of emergency room visits and hospital admissions for
any cause.
The extent to which RMG prescriptions may have been diverted, rather than used as indicated, was not
possible to assess through the health administrative data used in the study.
However, the success of an intervention is generally considered a good marker of adherence (if clients
didn’t take their prescriptions, the prescriptions would not work).
(38) Youth Substance Use Prevention Grants and Contributions Program (YSUPP)
OVERVIEW AND PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM
In Budget 2023, PHAC received $20.2 million over five years starting in 2023-24, for a new community-
based program to prevent substance use among young people, under the renewed Canadian Drugs and
Substances Strategy (CDSS).
This new program is focussed on building protective factors and decreasing risk factors with a
community collaborative approach based on the Icelandic Prevention Model (IPM).
PHAC’s new funding program aims to:
Build capacity in communities to adapt and implement an upstream substance use prevention model
that follows the key principles and steps of the IPM;
Support the Canadian implementation of the IPM, by evaluating the adaptation of the IPM in the
Canadian context; and
Promote knowledge development and exchange across Canada.
To maximize the overall impact of the investment, the program supports two streams of Grants &
Contributions funding for implementation of the IPM, alongside a Knowledge Development & Exchange
Hub.
Stream 1 - Incubator and Capacity Building: This stream of funding supports communities with building
capacity to implement the IPM. Capacity-building activities may include, but are not limited to,
development of project networks or coalitions, collaborations, and partnerships; community-based
knowledge dissemination; synthesis; mobilization activities; and pre-data collection planning.
Stream 2 - Implementation of Intervention Research: This stream of funding supports communities to
deliver and evaluate an intervention, identified by the community (including youth and multi-sectoral
partners), to address the key risk and protective factors identified through real-time, local data. Funding
is available for organizations previously funded under Stream 1, and communities that have already
started to implement the IPM.
Knowledge Development & Exchange Hub: The Hub leads the Canadian
adaptation of the Icelandic Program Model through partnership with Planet Youth Iceland and PHAC
Stream 1 & 2 funded projects, and insights from Canadian communities interested in implementing the
IPM. This includes national knowledge mobilization to synthesize learnings, disseminate knowledge and
build capacity of communities already implementing the model, and establishing a pan-Canadian
Community of Practice (CoP) on upstream prevention of substance-related harms in youth.
BACKGROUND ON THE ICELANDIC PREVENTION MODEL
The IPM is a population health approach that considers the broader social surroundings affecting youth
such as the home, school, and peer environments, rather than focusing on changing individual
behaviour.
The model assumes that:
Substance-related harms are not randomly distributed in the population;
Behaviour change is notoriously difficult to accomplish; and
There are no quick fixes or simple solutions. Long-term changes will require contextual community-level
adjustments.
Supported by Planet Youth Iceland, IPM is a multi-phased, multi-year approach with three key
ingredients:
Cross-sectoral commitments and partnerships at a community level;
Real-time, local data to support decision-making and foster dialogue; and
Interventions decided-by the people of the community.
The IPM process sets out guiding principles and steps that include building local community coalitions,
data collection and analysis (including youth surveys) and planning community-wide interventions to
reduce youth substance use harms.
The IPM has been implemented in Iceland and over 20 countries worldwide by Planet Youth, a research
consultancy based in Reykjavik, Iceland. Planet Youth has had various levels of partnerships across the
world, including with governments and with non- governmental organizations and from national to local
levels.
In Canada to date, six communities/jurisdictions have partnered with Planet Youth to implement the
Icelandic Prevention Model:
Planet Youth Lanark County - led by a local steering committee (Ontario);
Planet Youth New Brunswick / Planète Jeunesse Nouveau-Brunswick led by the province of New
Brunswick;
Planet Youth Calgary led by United Way of Calgary and Area;
Planet Youth Timmins led by Porcupine Health Unit (Ontario);
Planet Youth Timiskaming led by the Timiskaming Health Unit (Ontario); and
Planet Youth Nipissing led by the North Bay Parry Sound District Health Unit (Ontario).
Since 2018, Public Health Agency of Canada officials have been in contact with Planet Youth and public
health stakeholders to exchange information on the model. PHAC has also supported upstream
prevention efforts by developing an Evaluation guide in collaboration with Planet Youth Lanark County
and by acting as Secretariat for the
Icelandic Approach Community of Practice (led by the Southwestern Public Health Unit in Ontario).
CURRENT STATUS
The Targeted Solicitation and proposal review process for the Knowledge Development and Exchange
(KDE) Hub were completed in December 2023. The multi-year contribution agreement between PHAC
and the selected organization is targeted for February 2024.
The program's Open Solicitation for Stream 1, Incubator and Capacity Building, closed on January 15,
2024. Proposal review and assessment is underway, targeting grant agreements with four community
organizations by March 2024.
The Targeted Solicitation for Stream 2, Implementation and Intervention Research, is planned for Spring
2024.
(39) Recent OPQs
1. Q-1708
September 14, 2023 — Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock) — With regard to the government’s
safer supply program: (a) what were the projections showing a reduction of
overdoses that were used to justify implementing the program; (b) off of what methodology were the
projections in (a) based; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the number of overdoses
increased following the implementation of the program; and (d) when did the government first become
aware that its projections showing that overdoses would decrease were flawed and inaccurate?
2. Q-1754
September 25, 2023 — Mr. Lloyd (Sturgeon River—Parkland) — With regard to the upcoming tenth
session of the Conference of the Parties (COP10) to the World Health Organization (WHO) Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control, from November 10 to 25, 2023, and the third session of the Meeting of
Parties (MOP3) to the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, from November 27 to 30,
2023: (a) how many individuals will be part of the government's delegation and what are their names
and titles; (b) what is the overall budget for the government's COP10 and MOP3 participation, broken
down by (i) accommodations, (ii) meals or per diems, (iii) hospitality; (c) what are the government's key
priorities or action items for both the COP10 and MOP3; and (d) has the government been assigned any
specific agenda items or resolutions for both the COP1O and MOP3, and, if so, what are they?
3. Q-1760
September 26, 2023 — Mr. Khanna (Oxford) — With regard to the government’s response to drug
addiction: (a) what are the government’s estimates on the number of Canadians who are addicted to
illicit drugs, broken down by substance; (b) for each substance in (a), what is the government’s strategy
to get those addicted into treatment and recovery, or to otherwise stop the addiction; (c) how much
funding is being provided for the treatment and recovery strategy, broken down by year for the next five
years; and (d) what are the government’s targets on how many fewer people will be addicted to each
substance in (a), broken down by substance and year for the next five years?
4. Q-1776
September 28, 2023 — Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock) — With regard to the government’s
“safe supply” initiative: (a) how much (i) heroin, (ii) crack cocaine, (iii) cocaine, (iv) fentanyl, (v)
methamphetamine or crystal methamphetamine, (vi) other substance, broken down by type, does the
government estimate was distributed as part of “safe supply” in total and broken down by year since
2018; and (b) what is the breakdown of (a) by province or territory?
5. Q-1809
October 12, 2023 — Mr. Ellis (Cumberland—Colchester) — With regard to the government's Substance
Use and Addictions Program, broken down annually for each of the last five years:
how much funding has been provided through the program; (b) how was the funding spent, broken
down by type of expenditure; (c) what are the details of the funding recipients, including (i) which
entities received funding through the program, including the name and location of each entity, (ii) how
much funding each entity receive, (iii) what the funding was intended for; (d) what was the breakdown
of the funding by province or territory and by municipal area, if known; and (e) what was the breakdown
of the funding by type of substance?
6. Q-2043 – Pending Approval November 30, 2023 — Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake)
— With regard to the government's Substance Use and Addictions Program and the funding of London
InterCommunity Health Centre (LIHC) program: (a) what criteria has the government established to
measure the success of the LIHC program, and are these success criteria being met; (b) how frequently
does the government receive updates or reports from the LIHCregarding its performance and success in
meeting the specified criteria; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the number of
overdoses increased following the implementation of the program; (d) what is the government’s
explanation for why opioid- related deaths and hospitalizations are greater in the Middlesex—London
area compared to the rest of Ontario; (e) is the government studying or assessing the diversion of drugs
from the LIHC program; (f) what measures are being taken to prevent the diversion of drugs from the
LIHC program; and (g) how is the government educating the public about the harms of diversion?
7. Q-2116 – Pending Approval
December 12, 2023 — Mr. Johns (Courtenay—Alberni) — With regard to Health Canada’s Substance Use
and Addictions Program (SUAP), and broken down by fiscal year since 2021- 22: (a) what are the details
of all requests for funding from community-led and not-for-profit organizations, including the (i) date of
the request, (ii) requester name, (iii) amount of funding requested, (iv) amount of funding approved; (b)
what is the total amount of funding that was requested by community-led and not-for-profit
organizations; (c) what is the total amount of funding that was provided to community-led and not-for-
profit organizations; (d) broken down by level of government, what are the details of all funding transfers
to provincial, territorial, or municipal governments, including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester
name, (iii) amount of funding requested, and (iv) amount of funding approved; (e) what is the total
amount of funding that was requested by other levels of government; and (f) what was the total amount
of funding provided to other levels of government?
8. Q-2190 – Pending Approval
December 13, 2023 — Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake) — With regard to meetings involving
the government about safe supply, safer supply, pharmaceutical alternatives to the toxic, illegal or illicit
drug supply, pharmaceutical grade medication as an alternative to the toxic, illegal or illicit drug supply,
and medications for substance use disorder and to provide pharmaceutical alternatives to the
contaminated illegal or illicit drug supply: what are the details of meetings over the last five years
between government and pharmaceutical companies, government and opioid manufacturers,
government and lobby companies, and government and stakeholders, including, for each, the (i) date, (ii)
location, (iii) type and purpose of the meeting, (iv) names of the organizations represented, (v) names
and titles of the individuals in attendance, including both government officials and other attendees?
9. Q-2204 – Not Received
• December 14, 2023 — Mr. Davies (Vancouver Kingsway) — With regard to the federal tobacco
control strategy for fiscal year 2022-23: (a) what was the budget for the strategy; (b) how much of that
budget was spent within each fiscal year; (c) how much was spent on each component of the strategy,
specifically (i) mass media, (ii) policy and regulatory development, (iii) research, (iv) surveillance, (v)
enforcement, (vi) grants and contributions, (vii) programs for Indigenous Canadians; (d) were any other
activities not listed in (c) funded by the strategy, and, if so, how much was spent on each of these
activities; and (e) was part of the budget reallocated for purposes other than tobacco control, and, if so,
how much was reallocated?
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO
Q-1708 BY
Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock) DATE
September 14, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the government’s safer supply program: (a) what were the projections showing a
reduction of overdoses that were used to justify implementing the program; (b) off of what methodology
were the projections in (a) based; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the number of
overdoses increased following the implementation of the program; and (d) when did the government
first become aware that its projections showing that overdoses would decrease were flawed and
inaccurate?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Since 2017, guided by the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS), the Government of Canada
has taken a comprehensive approach to address substance use issues and the overdose crisis, supported
by over $1 billion in spending. There is no one-size-fits-all solution to prevent or reduce overdose deaths
— a full range of services and supports are needed.
Safer supply sits within a continuum of services where medications are prescribed in the context of a
therapeutic relationship between a healthcare provider and a patient. Safer supply services are informed
by well-established domestic and international evidence from medication-assisted treatment (MAT)
services, which are considered the gold standard of treatment for substance use disorder.
With regard to questions (a) and (b) above, surveillance conducted by the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) on the overdose crisis shows a significant increase in apparent opioid-toxicity deaths in
Canada beginning with the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, and rates remain elevated today. PHAC also
conducts forward modelling to provide estimates of how many opioid-related deaths may occur over the
coming months in Canada. Projections are based on assumptions regarding the toxicity of the illegal drug
supply and the impact of health interventions. The model considers all health interventions together and
does not report projections for specific interventions, such as safer supply. The model is updated twice a
year, in June and December.
Health Canada recognizes that additional high-quality evidence is needed that address potential benefits
and risks of safer supply. To help build this evidence, Health Canada is supporting assessment and
evaluation projects related to Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP)-funded pilot projects. This
includes a preliminary assessment of 10 safer supply pilot projects in Ontario, British Columbia and New
Brunswick. The federal government, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), is also
supporting a study being conducted by a research team from the Canadian Research Initiative in
Substance Misuse. This four-year evaluation research project focuses on program implementation and
the short-term health outcomes of eleven of the government funded safer supply pilot projects. The
final results of this study are expected in 2025. Additionally, CIHR has awarded $2 million to the
University of Victoria to support a four-year study evaluating the safer supply initiatives in British
Columbia in partnership with Indigenous leaders, Elders and system partners.
With regard to questions (c) and (d) above, there is no one single intervention alone that will reduce
overdose deaths and solve the overdose crisis. This crisis is being driven by a highly toxic illegal drug
supply and a number of underlying socio-economic factors. This is why the federal government has taken
a broad, comprehensive approach under the CDSS focusing on prevention, treatment, harm reduction
and enforcement.
All SUAP-funded safer supply pilot projects are time-limited, innovative interventions designed to
evaluate the effectiveness of providing pharmaceutical-grade medications as safer alternatives to the
contaminated illegal drug supply in Canada. These pilot projects must have linkages to provincial and/or
territorial health systems, involvement of people with lived and living experience of substance use in
design and planning, prescriber/health care provider oversight, and must demonstrate commitments to
research and evaluation.
Safer supply services exist in a limited number of locations in Canada, and currently serve a relatively
small number of clients compared to the total number of people who use drugs and who are at risk of
overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply in Canada. At the federal level, there are 29 funded pilot
projects, serving approximately 4,300 clients nationally. The focus of federally funded projects has been
on building the evidence around this new practice.
Under the CDSS, the Government of Canada will continue to undertake a comprehensive and evidence-
based approach to substance use issues and the overdose crisis, including testing new ideas and
approaches to help save lives and reduce harms. We will continue to work with all levels of governments
and key stakeholders, who also have critical roles to play. We will continue to monitor and assess all
available evidence regarding our approach, including studying the outcomes of safer supply pilot
projects, to inform both current and future actions, and make adjustments including implementing risk
mitigation measures as appropriate.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1754 BY
Mr. Lloyd (Sturgeon River—Parkland) DATE
September 25, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY MINISTRE OU SECRÉTAIRE PARLEMENTAIRE
QUESTION
With regard to the upcoming tenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP10) to the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, from November 10 to 25, 2023, and the third
session of the Meeting of Parties (MOP3) to the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products,
from November 27 to 30, 2023: (a) how many individuals will be part of the government's delegation
and what are their names and titles; (b) what is the overall budget for the government's COP10 and
MOP3 participation, broken down by (i) accommodations, (ii) meals or per diems, (iii) hospitality; (c)
what are the government's key priorities or action items for both the COP10 and MOP3; and (d) has the
government been assigned any specific agenda items or resolutions for both the COP1O and MOP3, and,
if so, what are they?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
In accordance with the Directive on Travel, Hospitality, Conference and Event Expenditures, Health
Canada strives to find economical means of travel while considering alternatives that minimize or limit
travel costs. This includes limiting the number of departmental travellers to the minimum necessary to
deliver the business of government, making use of virtual options of participation when available, and
selecting economical meals of travel when booking transportation and accommodations.
(a) The Government of Canada plans to send a delegation of ten individuals to COP10, November
20-25, 2023, including:
Dr. Sonia Johnson, Director General, Tobacco Control Directorate (TCD), Controlled Substances and
Cannabis Branch (CSCB), Health Canada (HC)
Ms. Laura Smith, Director, Office of Policy and Strategic Planning (OPSP), TCD, CSCB, HC
Mr. Denis Choinière, Director, Tobacco Products Regulatory Office, TCD, CSCB, HC
Ms. Kemba Anderson-Gohlor, Regional Coordinator to the Conference of the Parties for the Region of the
Americas, and Manager, Regulatory and International Policy Unit, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
Mr. Dylan Upper, Acting Manager, Multilateral Relations Division, Office of International Affairs for the
Health Portfolio
Ms. Angélique Bisson, Senior Policy Analyst, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
Ms. Mireille Rigby, Senior Policy Analyst, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
One domestic Non-governmental Organization Representative
Two representatives from the Government of Québec (Provincial/territorial representatives – travelling
at their own expense)
(b) The total cost of travel for COP10, for delegates whose travel is being funded by Health Canada,
is as follows:
Accommodations: $9,500
Meals and per diems: $11,651
Hospitality: N/A
Please note, flights are still in the process of being booked, therefore the final cost is unavailable at this
time. Estimated flights costs are: $16,500.
(c) The government’s key priorities for COP10 are focused on bolstering the Framework Convention
on Tobacco Control implementation globally, enhancing transparency and accountability of the COP and
exploring measures that go beyond the FCTC. In particular, Canada will focus on:
Forward Looking Tobacco Control Measures: Canada has put forward a proposal to COP to consider
exploring tobacco control measures that extend beyond the provisions of the WHO Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC). Through this decision point, Canada’s aims to generate new
discussions on tobacco control and reinvigorate a collective response to the global tobacco epidemic.
Supporting Global Implementation of the FCTC: Canada is committed to supporting a new peer-review
and evaluation support mechanism. Canada believes this mechanism will strengthen global
implementation of the FCTC, ensuring that its provisions are effectively translated into action at the
national level. The WHO Convention Secretariat report associated with this agenda item, can be found at
the following link: https://storage.googleapis.com/who-fctc-cop10-source/Main%20documents/fctc-
cop10-14-en.pdf
Enhancing Transparency and Accountability: Canada will advocate for increased transparency and
accountability of COP through webcasting the plenary sessions.
These priorities underscore Canada’s dedication to public health and our leadership in the global tobacco
control community.
(d) Canada has not been assigned any specific agenda items for COP, but Canada will be presenting a
draft decision for adoption on “Forward looking tobacco control measures” as is detailed above. The
WHO Convention Secretariat report associated with this agenda item , can be found at the following link:
https://storage.googleapis.com/who-fctc-cop10-source/Main%20documents/fctc-cop10-11-en.pdf
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1760 BY /
Mr. Khanna (Oxford) DATE
September 26, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the government’s response to drug addiction: (a) what are the government’s estimates
on the number of Canadians who are addicted to illicit drugs, broken down by substance; (b) for each
substance in (a), what is the government’s strategy to get those addicted into treatment and recovery, or
to otherwise stop the addiction; (c) how much funding is being provided for the treatment and recovery
strategy, broken down by year for the next five years; and (d) what are the government’s targets on how
many fewer people will be addicted to each substance in (a), broken down by substance and year for the
next five years?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Since 2016, guided by the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS), the Government of Canada
has taken a comprehensive approach to address substance use issues and the overdose crisis, supported
by a full range of evidence-based actions, focused on prevention, harm reduction, treatment and
enforcement.
Regarding question (a) People’s substance use can change and move across a range over time, from no
use at one end to substance use disorder at the other end. Additionally, stigma associated with
substance use can cause individuals to hide their use. Given these considerations, it is difficult to
estimate the number of Canadians who have a substance use disorder.
Findings from the Mental Health Access to Care Survey, 2022 estimate that 0.5% percent of Canadians
met the criteria for recurrent use with associated harms or dependence of substances such as cocaine,
ecstasy, hallucinogens (e.g., PCP, LSD), heroin, solvents, other illegal drugs and nonmedical use of
prescription sedatives, analgesics, stimulants in the past 12 months and 3.6% of Canadians met the
criteria at some point in their lifetime. These estimates were unchanged (i.e., the differences were not
statistically significant) from 0.7% and 4.0%, respectively, in 2012.
Regarding question (b) and (c) Health care and addressing substance use is a shared responsibility with
provinces and territories. While provinces and territories are primarily responsible for the delivery of
substance-use treatment services, the federal government has a role to play in supporting the availability
of evidence-based treatment options. The Government of Canada recognizes that improved access to
treatment services can help those struggling with substance use and save lives. This includes actions
such as:
Removing barriers to accessing medications used for the treatment of opioid use disorder by:
Issuing a class exemption for patients, practitioners, and pharmacists prescribing and providing
controlled substances in Canada to ensure continuity of care;
Approving injectable hydromorphone and diacetylmorphine as treatment options for patients with
severe opioid use disorder; and,
Facilitating the prescribing and dispensing of methadone and diacetylmorphine through regulatory
amendments.
Funding the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse to identify or develop appropriate
evidence-based clinical and community-based interventions for substance use and to facilitate providers
and decision-makers in implementing services that we know are effective. This includes guidance
documents for the treatment of opioid and other substance use disorders.
Partnering with the Standards Council of Canada to coordinate the development of standards for mental
health and substance use health services in key areas, including withdrawal management and
competencies for non- addictions healthcare providers, with a focus on health equity.
To support the timely access to quality mental health and substance use services for individuals in
Canada, regardless of where they live. The Government of Canada also provides support to provinces
and territories in their direct delivery of substance-use treatment services through investments. For
example, through Budget 2023, the Government of Canada is providing $196.1 billion over ten years,
including $46.2 billion in new funding through the Canada Health Transfer and other mechanisms, for
provinces and territories to improve health care services for Canadians, which includes$25 billion over
ten years to provinces and territories for bilateral agreements to address unique needs in four shared
health priorities, including access to quality mental health and substance use services.
In addition, the federal government will invest $2 billion over 10 years to support Indigenous priorities
and $505 million over 5 years in complementary federal support.
These investments build on previous federal initiatives aimed at supporting the provinces and territories
in improving access to treatment and recovery services for substance use disorders, including:
Significant investments from the Government of Canada in treatment services, including committing
$150 million through Budget 2018 for the Emergency Treatment Fund, which ended in March 2023. This
funding was matched by the provinces and territories, bringing the total investment to $300 million.
Provinces and territories have used federal investments to expand treatment approaches such as
services to support youth with substance use disorder, withdrawal management services appropriate for
people who use methamphetamine, Rapid Access Addictions Medicine clinics, expand access to opioid
dependence treatments, and culturally-appropriate care for Indigenous communities.
Funds have also been used to implement innovative approaches to treatment including ‘wrap-around’
care and the development of telehealth infrastructure to connect clients to treatment in remote and
rural settings.
The Government of Canada invested $5 billion over ten years in 2017 to support the provinces and
territories in improving access to mental health and substance use services and supports. Federal,
provincial and territorial governments also agreed as part of A Common Statement of Principles on
Shared Health Priorities, to report on progress on improving access to these services through the
Canadian Institute for Health Information.
Budget 2023 also provides $359.2 million to support the implementation of a renewed CDSS for new and
on-going activities to support a continuum of care for people who use substances, including prevention,
treatment, harm reduction, and recovery. The funding announced in Budget 2023 will complement the
more than $505 million since 2017 that SUAP has already committed to over 380 innovative and
evidence-informed projects including substance use prevention, harm reduction and treatment
initiatives across the country. Through active SUAP agreements, $156.1 million is committed over the
next 5 years (Fiscal Year (FY) 2023/24 to FY 2027/28) to fund a wide-range of projects that address
substance use issues across the continuum of care. Of this funding, $63.25 million has been committed
to organizations that deliver treatment and recovery initiatives. The table below provides a breakdown
of this funding by fiscal year:
SUAP Funding: Treatment and Recovery Projects FY 23/24 FY 24/25 FY 25/26 Total
$26,448,050 $34,067,162 $2,730,205 $63,245,417
Regarding question (d) The Government of Canada is committed to reporting on results of the CDSS
through Health Canada’s Departmental Results Report.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1776 BY
Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock) DATE
September 28, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY MINISTRE
QUESTION
With regard to the government’s “safe supply” initiative: (a) how much (i) heroin, (ii) crack cocaine, (iii)
cocaine, (iv) fentanyl, (v) methamphetamine or crystal methamphetamine, (vi) other substance, broken
down by type, does the government estimate was distributed as part of “safe supply” in total and broken
down by year since 2018; and (b) what is the breakdown of (a) by province or territory?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Most healthcare services that support people who use drugs fall under provincial and territorial
jurisdiction, and the federal government does not routinely collect detailed information on drug
treatment or safer supply programs that are run by provinces and territories.
It should be noted that prescribers can only prescribe medications pursuant to the requirements of the
Food and Drug Act, the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, and their associated Regulations. Illegally
produced drugs such as crystal methamphetamine and crack cocaine do not exist in pharmaceutical
form, and thus are not used in medication-assisted drug treatment programs or safer supply programs.
For its part, Health Canada provides time-limited grants and contributions funding to 29 safer supply
pilot projects to help save lives and build evidence in terms of both benefits and risks of safer supply. Of
these 29 projects, 4 focus on research, knowledge exchange, and evaluation, and 24 provide services
directly to clients in BC, Ontario, and New Brunswick. Federal grants and contributions funding is also
provided to the Government of Quebec directly to help support substance use services delivered by the
province, including safer supply (counted as 1 project)
The following table provides the most up to data available on substances used in Health Canada funded,
safer supply projects. These medications evolve over time at the discretion of prescribers, based on the
clients they serve. Some of the medications are prescribed on-label for opioid use disorder, and some
are prescribed off-label (i.e. not for their labeled indication).
Substance BC (8 projects) ON(15 projects) NB(1 projects) Total (24 projects)
Fentanyl (various formulations offered, including patches and tablets)
7 4 1 12
Tablet hydromorphone 8 13 0 21
Injectable hydromorphone 4 4 1 9
Injectable diacetylmorphine 1 - - 1
Oxycodone 2 2 - 4
Stimulant Therapy (various formulations offered, including amphetamine/dextroamphetamine,
lisdexamfetamine dimesylate, and methylphenidate)
3 8 1 12
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1809 BY
Mr. Ellis (Cumberland—Colchester) DATE
October 12, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY MINISTRE
QUESTION
With regard to the government's Substance Use and Addictions Program, broken down annually for each
of the last five years: (a) how much funding has been provided through the program; (b) how was the
funding spent, broken down by type of expenditure; (c) what are the details of the funding recipients,
including (i) which entities received funding through the program, including the name and location of
each entity, (ii) how much funding each entity receive, (iii) what the funding was intended for; (d) what
was the breakdown of the funding by province or territory and by municipal area, if known; and (e) what
was the breakdown of the funding by type of substance?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
(a) Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides time-limited grants and
contributions funding that supports evidence-informed initiatives that help to address the overdose
crisis and substance use issues. Between 2019 and 2024, over $450M has been provided through the
program. The SUAP funding broken down annually for each of the last five years is as follows by fiscal
year (FY):
FY 2019/2020: $37,417,022
FY 2020/2021: $63,154,980
FY 2021/2022: $85,313,019
FY 2022/2023: $140,061,872
FY 2023/2024: $124,369,591
Total: $450,316,484
(b) Program grants and contribution funding is allocated to recipient organizations in support of a
defined set of activities. Eligible expenses are defined under the SUAP Terms and Conditions, described
in the Guidelines for Applicants for each SUAP call for proposals and outlined in the Contribution
Agreements. Health Canada does not track individual expenditures by each organization. Rather, in
accordance with the Policy on Transfer Payments, all SUAP program funding recipients must provide a
detailed cashflow forecast once per year, as well as a record of expenditures twice per year. Payments
are made in the form of reimbursement to program recipients for eligible expenditures incurred
following acceptance by internal oversight and control systems.
(c) A full summary of the 374 funding recipients which received funding from 2019/20 to 2023/24 is
attached (see Annex A).
This document includes a list of organization names, project titles and description, location including city
and province, amount of funding committed and what the funding was or is intended for, for each entity.
Please note that this data was extracted on October 13, 2023.
(d) The following figures show the breakdown of SUAP funding through 2019/20-2023/24 by
province/territory and by municipal area:
Note: The number of projects funded in each province or territory can vary based on several factors.
Regions with a higher population or with a higher concentration of national-scope not-for-profit
organizations, such as Ontario, have a larger number of active projects than smaller jurisdictions. As per
a 2017 agreement between the Minister of Health and Quebec’s Ministère de la Santé et des Services
sociaux (MSSS), SUAP funding proportionate to Quebec’s percentage of the Canadian population
(approximately 22.5% of total SUAP funding), is allocated to Quebec. Under this agreement, SUAP has
signed Contribution Agreements directly with the MSSS and the MSSS works with partner organizations
to redistribute SUAP funds within the province. Other projects funded in the province are national in
scope.
ALBERTA
29 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Atikameg - - - $109,489 $39,320 $148,809
Calgary $735,539 $1,075,894 $2,456,173 $4,089,249 $3,067,653 $11,424,508
Eden Valley - - - $721,072 $678,968 $1,400,040
Edmonton $464,879 $1,151,515 $1,778,122 $3,709,041 $1,383,361 $8,486,918
Edmonton & Calgary - $158,873 $175,375 $116,202 $29,775 $480,225
Fort McMurray - - - $440,973 $299,386 $740,359
Grand Prairie - - - $120,138 $921,522 $1,041,660
Onoway - - $150,000 $150,000 - $300,000
Standoff - - - $688,028 $467,117 $1,155,145
Stony Plain - - - $502,914 $1,969,485 $2,472,399
$27,650,063
BRITISH COLUMBIA
90 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Agassiz - - - $20,150 $253,123 $273,273
Burnaby - - - $401,825 $541,429 $943,254
Campbell River - - - $1,508,724 $1,515,951 $3,024,675
Chilliwack - - - $103,361 $930,247 $1,033,608
Comox - - - $10,000 $65,000 $75,000
Delta - - - $167,969 $1,146,441 $1,314,410
Houston - - $210,700 $212,303 $212,303 $635,306
Kelowna - $174,250 $291,750 $712,396 $492,042 $1,670,438
Mission - - - $14,450 $150,921 $165,371
Nanaimo - - - $864,488 $701,288 $1,565,776
Nelson $20,000 $262,000 $284,000 $397,985 $397,985 $1,361,970
New Westminster - - - $231,450 $567,151 $798,601
Pender Island - $11,523 $165,356 $168,056 $168,056 $512,991
Penticton - - - $7,390 $166,966 $174,356
Port Alberni - - - $214,975 $212,054 $427,029
Powell River - - - $19,357 $148,479 $167,836
Quesnel - - - $308,310 $268,901 $577,211
Squamish - - - $571,432 $747,545 $1,318,977
Surrey - $452,791 $818,192 $1,677,526 $1,961,621 $4,910,130
Vancouver $6,891,832 $11,824,700 $13,502,597 $21,064,125 $16,611,057 $69,894,311
Victoria $1,030,769 $2,487,258 $3,964,319 $6,179,448 $5,140,882 $18,802,676
$109,647,199
MANITOBA
22 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Brandon - - - $150,744 $124,281 $275,025
Pine Falls - - - $68,670 $68,867 $137,537
Pine Falls & Selkirk - $26,606 $37,129 $127,261 $130,000 $320,996
Steinbach - - - $64,200 $491,400 $555,600
Winnipeg $1,099,409 $1,607,378 $2,944,375 $4,318,971 $4,991,728 $14,961,861
$16,251,019
NEW BRUNSWICK
6 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Eel Ground - - - - $600,257 $600,257
Fredericton $238,998 $897,867 $1,502,406 $1,497,195 $1,512,276 $5,648,742
Moncton - - - $422,593 $370,570 $793,163
Saint John $346,367 $208,692 $100,913 $42,530 $352,035 $1,050,537
$8,092,699
NEWFOUNDLAND
11 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Bell Island - - - $281,850 $344,725 $626,575
Clarenville & Bonavista - - - $126,107 $91,373 $217,480
Goose Bay - - - $160,280 $113,869 $274,149
Mount Pearl - - - $12,605 $96,684 $109,289
Nunatsiavut - $97,963 $146,214 $181,214 - $425,391
St. John’s $445,774 $436,774 $250,415 $452,969 $1,421,457 $3,007,389
$4,660,273
NOVA SCOTIA
13 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Cape Breton - - - $356,466 $135,763 $492,229
Halifax - $212,657 $763,109 $1,741,032 $2,702,791 $5,419,589
Kentville - - - $113,500 $57,000 $170,500
Sydney - - - $189,435 $128,611 $318,046
Yarmouth $285,801 $285,801 $208,909 - - $780,511
$7,180,875
NORTHWEST TERRITORIES
3 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Fort McPherson - - - $140,000 $50,278 $190,278
Yellowknife $1,077,873 $328,110 $584,161 $1,564,551 $1,417,051 $4,971,746
$5,162,024
NUNAVUT
1 project from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Hamlet of Pangnirtung - - - - $172,011 $172,011
$172,011
ONTARIO
174 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Aurora - - - $44,037 $329,637 $373,674
Belleville - - - $59,400 $471,748 $531,148
Birch Island $201,718 $320,770 $263,390 - - $785,878
Bothwell - $169,705 $155,705 $155,703 $155,700 $636,813
Brantford - - $480,521 $811,131 $816,694 $2,108,346
Chatham - - - $46,536 $356,955 $403,491
Concord - - - $427,016 $153,353 $580,369
Garden Village - - - $225,000 $161,606 $386,606
Guelph $50,629 $51,055 $817,265 $2,814,140 $2,201,681 $5,934,770
Hamilton $101,225 - $744,483 $2,330,389 $2,887,625 $6,063,722
Kingston $166,500 - - $983,915 $353,349 $1,503,764
Kitchener - $190,685 $1,058,100 $2,695,310 $2,084,892 $6,028,987
Lanark - $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 - $300,000
Lindsay - - $212,800 $292,887 $359,450 $865,137
London $103,300 $2,064,705 $3,278,128 $5,151,235 $3,140,108 $13,737,476
M’Chigeeng - - $471,019 $1,028,137 $400,000 $1,899,156
Markdale - - - $30,949 $237,394 $268,343
Markham $257,187 - - - - $257,187
Massey - $187,500 $187,500 $187,500 - $562,500
Midland - - - $39,888 $300,982 $340,870
North York - - - $288,589 $195,929 $484,518
Newmarket - $22,689 $99,680 $71,231 - $193,600
North Bay - $136,135 $310,000 $108,865 - $555,000
Ohsweken - $137,077 $342,693 $497,093 $299,722 1,276,585
Ottawa $5,622,458 $10,855,176 $15,076,379 $21,010,788 $15,600,570 $68,165,371
Owen Sound - - - $982,074 $968,732 1,950,806
Peterborough $34,045 $626,340 $1,294,654 $2,481,731 $2,314,980 $6,751,750
Sault Ste. Marie $353,470 $342,049 $370,666 $224,685 $56,955 $1,347,825
Scarborough - $158,018 $239,050 $337,306 $414,442 $1,148,816
Shelburne $133,116 $402,011 $909,557 - - $1,444,684
Sioux Lookout - $785,842 $918,696 $918,696 $945,456 $3,568,690
Stony Point - $175,383 $251,592 $269,865 - $696,840
St. Catharines - - - $898,363 $322,626 $1,220,989
Sudbury - - - $439,586 $844,558 $1,284,144
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Thornhill - $1,000,000 - - - $1,000,000
Thunder Bay $366,000 $121,447 $123,123 $922,859 $1,099,391 2,632,820
Toronto $8,682,157 $11,538,682 $12,767,913 $17,534,571 $20,804,173 $71,327,496
Vaughn $166,500 - - - - $166,500
Waterloo $761,520 $1,392,235 $1,847,133 $1,208,460 $1,177,163 $6,386,511
Wikwemikong $195,486 $195,303 $133,780 $192,119 $103,244 $819,932
$215,991,114
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND
3 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Charlottetown - $86,986 $284,285 $759,495 $425,161 $1,555,927
$1,555,927
QUÉBEC
5 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Gatineau - - - $43,504 $246,763 $290,267
Montreal $25,000 - - $1,595,777 - $1,620,777
Québec (transfer to MSSS) $6,108,800 $8,049,055 $9,645,730 $9,028,350 $3,097,307 $35,929,242
$37,840,286
SASKATCHEWAN
11 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Nipawing - $123,246 $203,416 $369,001 $40,415 736,078
Prince Albert $170,253 $304,631 $53,350 $299,052 - 827,286
Regina $720,771 $854,467 $1,091,335 $545,978 $1,128,252 $4,340,803
Saskatoon $480,295 $889,333 $879,005 $3,600,583 $2,179,626 $8,028,842
$13,933,009
YUKON
6 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Pelly Crossing - - - $68,311 $776,500 $844,811
Whitehorse $79,350 $173,803 $367,856 $426,768 $287,397 $1,335,174
$2,179,985
(e) The following figures show the breakdown of the total funding for each fiscal year, by type of
substance:
Substance FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Alcohol $280,281 $255,302 $1,088,195 $2,101,352 $1,755,300 $5,480,430
Cannabis $12,454,675 $14,899,484 $14,076,909 $9,637,091 $3,374,073 $54,442,232
Methamphetamine $575,021 $2,448,178 $3,416,571 $4,687,784 $3,040,210 $14,167,764
Opioids $14,240,523 $27,534,465 $41,014,157 $68,524,100 $65,421,058 $216,734,303
Tobacco $1,844,429 $3,417,080 $3,522,392 $3,464,880 $3,330,781 $15,579,562
Multiple $8,022,092 $14,600,471 $22,194,795 $51,646,665 $47,448,170 $143,912,193
450,316,484
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-2043 BY
Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake) DATE
November 30, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the government's Substance Use and Addictions Program and the funding of London
InterCommunity Health Centre (LIHC) program: (a) what criteria has the government established to
measure the success of the LIHC program, and are these success criteria being met; (b) how frequently
does the government receive updates or reports from the LIHC regarding its performance and success in
meeting the specified criteria; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the number of
overdoses increased following the implementation of the program; (d) what is the government’s
explanation for why opioid-related deaths and hospitalizations are greater in the Middlesex—London
area compared to the rest of Ontario; (e) is the government studying or assessing the diversion of drugs
from the LIHC
program; (f) what measures are being taken to prevent the diversion of drugs from the LIHC program;
and (g) how is the government educating the public about the harms of diversion?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives (otherwise known as “safer supply”) involves the prescribing of
pharmaceutical-grade drugs as an alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply, with the goal of reducing
overdoses and saving lives. These programs are part of a suite of services for individuals and can also
connect people to other critical services and supports such as:
Primary healthcare
Mental health services
Housing
Job training
Drug treatment for those who are ready.
With regard to questions (a) and (b), above, Health Canada monitors and assesses federally-funded safer
supply pilot programs, including LIHC, in two ways.
First, recipient organizations provide Health Canada project-level reporting. Recipients, including LIHC,
are required to have a Performance Measurement and Evaluation Plan (PME) in place that is used by
Health Canada to monitor and measure the success of their project. The LIHC reports biannually on the
required indicators from their PME plan as part of their progress reports. Within three months from their
project end date, recipients including LIHC, provide a final performance report to Health Canada.
Performance indicators that must be reported on are the following:
SHORT TERM INDICATORS
OUTCOMES PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
1.1 Primary target population (Canadians or Stakeholders) have access to information on substance use
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a) # of participants reached (by gender, language, age, location or priority population: Indigenous,
2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities) in substance use-related learning opportunities delivered
by SUAP funded project
b) # of primary target population (Canadians or stakeholders) with access to substance use-related
knowledge products developed by SUAP funded project
c) % of primary target population (Canadians or stakeholders) who reported that they gained
knowledge/skills about substances as a result of the SUAP funded project by gender, language, age,
location or priority population: Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities
OUTCOMES
1.2 Increased availability of harm reduction services
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a) # of new services offered by SUAP funded project (including type of service)
b) # of clients accessing services offered by SUAP funded projects (by gender, language, age, location, or
priority population: Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities)
c) # of Naloxone kits distributed by SUAP funded project
MEDIUM TERM INDICATORS
Targeted
OUTCOMES
2.1 Data and research evidence on drugs, substance use, and emerging drug trends are used by targeted
stakeholders
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a) % of targeted stakeholders who reported that they used knowledge/skills related to substance use
provided by this project to make evidence informed improvements to policies, programs and practice
b) % of targeted stakeholders who reported that they intend to use knowledge/skills provided by this
project to make evidence informed improvements to policies, programs and practice
OUTCOMES
2.2 Reduction in risk-taking behaviour among people with problematic drug and substances use
OUTCOMES
a) % of targeted Canadians who reported that they used knowledge/skills related to substance use
provided by SUAP funded project by gender, language, age, location, or priority population: Indigenous,
2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities)
b) % of targeted Canadians who reported that they intend to use knowledge/skills related to substance
use provided by SUAP funded project (by gender, language, age, location, or priority population:
Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities)
c) % of clients in SUAP funded treatment and/or harm reduction services projects reporting a positive
behaviour/health outcome by gender, language, age, location, or priority population: Indigenous,
2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities
Canadians may include youth, adults and any other target groups or sub-populations as identified by
research and evidence. This relates to initiatives targeting individual behaviour change (or groups of
individuals)
Targeted Stakeholders may include other levels of governments, pan-Canadian health organizations,
non-profit organizations, communities or others at the organizational or system level. This relates to
initiatives targeting organization, system or policy and practice change.
Services Categories currently include: harm reduction / outreach; early intervention; treatment (OAT,
iOAT, TiOAT, methamphetamine treatment, nicotine vaping cessation); drug checking; safer supply;
surveillance.
At this time, LIHC is exceeding most of their targets in their PME. Health Canada officials meet every 30
to 60 days with representatives of the LIHC program to discuss workplan activities. Ongoing
communication occurs in between meetings. LIHC has fulfilled reporting requirements on time and is
proactive at communicating important project information as it comes up.
The second manner Health Canada monitors and assesses performance is through information
gathering, research, studies and program evaluations of the pilot projects. These are undertaken by both
Health Canada and independent researchers. The focus of this work is on program operations, barriers
and challenges, and program outcomes (such as reductions in overdoses, improvements in health,
connections to health and social services, impacts on criminal activities associated with substance use,
impacts on healthcare costs, etc.). Health Canada is seeing some promising early outcomes, including
reduced emergency department visits and hospitalizations. We are also hearing reports from safer
supply clients of reduced overdoses, reduced illegal drug use, and reduced criminal activity, along with
improvements to physical and mental health, and better access to wrap-around services like housing and
income supports.
The federal government has supported two assessment and evaluation projects related to the pilot
projects funded through SUAP, in which the LIHC has participated. This includes a preliminary
assessment of 10 pilot projects in Ontario, British Columbia and New Brunswick, and a study being
conducted by a research team from the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). In
addition, external, peer-reviewed and published research, specific to the LIHC safer supply program
demonstrated an attributable decline in emergency department visits and hospital admissions among
program participants.
With regard to questions (c) and (d), above, the scale of the overdose crisis in Canada is unprecedented.
Tragically, the rates of overdose deaths have been increasing in a number of jurisdictions in Canada, the
vast majority of which do not have safer supply programs in place. The toxicity of the illegal drug supply
continues to be a major driver of the overdose crisis. The latest available national data shows that 84%
of all apparent opioid toxicity deaths in the period of January to June 2023 involved fentanyl (an increase
of 47% since 2016) and 80% involved opioids that were only non-pharmaceutical.
Data shows that in Ontario opioid-related deaths and hospitalizations have increased significantly in
recent years, which is consistent with national trends.
Many jurisdictions and municipalities across Ontario have been tragically impacted by the toxicity of the
illegal drug supply, including the Middlesex-London area
The overdose crisis is a complex public health issue that affects each part of the country differently and
can fluctuate over time. As such, changes to death and harm rates in Middlesex-London cannot be
attributed to one specific factor. Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada continue to
monitor and analyze data to better assess impacts and longer-term trends.
Scientific research and evidence show that in order to save lives and protect the health and safety of
Canadians, a comprehensive evidence-based approach that includes a full continuum of supports is
necessary, including harm reduction services as well as treatment, prevention, and enforcement.
Part of this approach includes support for safer supply projects. It should be noted that the reach of
federally-funded safer supply projects is small compared to the total number of people who use drugs in
Canada and who are at risk of overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply. For example, the 29 pilot
projects currently funded by Health Canada have an estimated client base of 4300 people.
With regard to questions (e) and (f), above, Health Canada takes concerns regarding diversion seriously
and monitors for this risk across the supply chain for controlled substances in Canada. At the federal
level, the drugs used in projects offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives are regulated as
controlled substances and are subject to controls under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA)
and its regulations, including laws and regulations around storage, transport, and measures to help
prevent diversion. Programs offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives must also follow
provincial/territorial laws and regulations pertaining to prescribing of pharmaceutical drugs containing
controlled substances. Furthermore, the healthcare providers running the programs are subject to
oversight from their professional regulatory colleges.
In addition, projects offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives have implemented a range of
measures to help prevent diversion and ensure participant and community safety. These include
diversion mitigation protocols, client education around the risks and consequences of diversion, and
monitoring through urine drug screens and other client assessment tools. These activities are often
complemented by comprehensive wrap-around care, client engagement, and requirements around
secure storage.
The LIHC program requires each client to adhere to a set of guidelines in order to participate in the
program. These are outlined during the initial intake and in the Therapeutic Agreement and include
expectations to:
attend weekly appointments with their doctor, submit weekly urine samples and pick up their
medication as directed at their specified pharmacy
be honest with their doctor regarding drug use outside of their Safer Supply prescription
work with outreach workers, care facilitators, and/or systems navigators on social goals (housing, ODSP,
ID, etc.)
not sell or otherwise divert their Safer Supply medication.
In cases where diversion may be suspected, many programs take a progressive mitigation approach that
can be escalated to witnessed dosing, or client discharge/transfer. Diversion represents a reason for
removal from the LIHC Safer Opioid Supply program.
Health Canada is currently assessing the risk mitigation approaches of all federally-funded projects
offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives to better understand emerging practices and see if and
where they may be strengthened.
With regard to question (g), above, the Government of Canada takes a number of steps to inform the
public about substance use harms, including risks related to the use of prescription drugs that have been
diverted from their intended use.
Since 2017, over $44M has been committed for prevention and education activities, including, but not
limited to, $22.8M to support public education campaigns, such as:
The Know More Opioids campaign that engages teens and young adults on the facts surrounding
opioids, ways to reduce risks and the harms of stigma. Between April 2018 and November 2023, the
Know More tour had over 178,000 interactions with people through school and festival events and over
1,400 virtual and 380 in-person high school sessions.
The Ease the Burden campaign which seeks to raise awareness and reduce harms associated with the
use of opioids and other substances as well as stigma, especially for men in physically demanding jobs.
Between September 2022 to March 2023, the Ease the Burden webpage exceeded 142.7M views and
views of the campaign video have exceeded over 26.8M.
Health Canada also has a number of resources on its webpage to help inform the public about
prescription drugs and their associated benefits and risks, resources on how to use medications safely,
including advice on proper storage and disposal, which are important steps in reducing the risk of
diversion.
In addition, Health Canada works with industry, regulated health professionals, and provincial regulatory
colleges on how they can help to minimize substances misuse and diversion, including guidance on
reporting a loss or theft.
The overdose crisis is a complex public health issue. Health Canada recognizes that no single organization
or level of government can solve this situation alone. We remain committed to working with a wide
range of partners, including provinces and territories, Indigenous partners, other levels of government,
civil society organizations, direct care providers, researchers, and people with lived and living experience
to support people who use substances, advance solutions to save lives, and help end this national public
health crisis.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-2116 BY
Mr. Johns (Courtenay—Alberni) DATE
December 12, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), and broken down by
fiscal year since 2021-22: (a) what are the details of all requests for funding from community-led and
not-for-profit organizations, including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester name, (iii) amount of
funding requested, (iv) amount of funding approved; (b) what is the total amount of funding that was
requested by community-led and not-for-profit organizations; (c) what is the total amount of funding
that was provided to community-led and not-for-profit organizations; (d) broken down by level of
government, what are the details of all funding transfers to provincial, territorial, or municipal
governments, including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester name, (iii) amount of funding requested,
and (iv) amount of funding approved; (e) what is the total amount of funding that was requested by
other levels of government; and (f) what was the total amount of funding provided to other levels of
government?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
(f) Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides time-limited grants and
contributions funding that supports evidence-informed initiatives that help to address the overdose
crisis and substance use issues. SUAP received 454 funding requests from fiscal year 2021-2022 to
present. Of these requests, 182 were approved for funding and signed contribution agreements. The
detailed tables below include information on the projects that received funding since fiscal year 2021-
2022.
(g) The total amount of funding requested by community-led and not-for-profit organizations,
including other levels of government, since 2021-2022 is $454,538,192.
(h) The total amount of funding approved for community-led and not-for-profit organizations,
including other levels of government, since 2021-2022 is $ 211,125,399.
(i) The table below includes information on SUAP funding approved for other levels of government
(provincial, territorial, municipal) from fiscal year 2021-2022 to present.
(j) SUAP received 34 funding requests from other levels of government in 2021-2022, valued at
$24,560,225. No funding requests from other levels of government were submitted in 2022-2023. SUAP
received one (1) funding request from the Government of Quebec for 2023-2024 valued at $58,198,973.
(k) Of the requests received, 25 projects with other levels of government have been funded by
SUAP since 2021- 2022, with a combined funding value of $76,064,814.
A summary of SUAP funding approved for other levels of government is included in the detailed table
below.
Note: Due to the principles set out in the Access to Information Act and the Privacy Act on protecting
sensitive, third- party data, the tables below do not include the date of the request, requester name and
amount of funding requested for applicants, including other levels of government, that were not
approved for SUAP funding. The amount of funding requested for each of the organizations that were
not approved for funding is information of business value that cannot be released without the written
consent of those organizations.
Note also that the 2023 SUAP Call for Proposals ended on November 22, 2023 and is still being
processed. Information on the proposals received and funded is not yet available.
SUAP Funding Summary
(Note: This table excludes funding to other levels of government)
Fiscal Year 2021-2022
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
1 Addiction Services Central Ontario 2021-09-24 $692,419
2 AIDS Committee of Newfoundland & Labrador Inc. 2021-09-24 $217,480
3 Alberni Valley Drug and Alcohol Prevention Services Society 2021-09-24 $427,029
4 Alberta Alliance Who Educates and Advocates Responsibly Society 2021-09-24 $790,927
5 Ally Centre of Cape Breton 2021-09-24 $318,046
6 Atira Women's Resource Society 2021-09-24 $656,786
7 AVI Health and Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $1,565,776
8 AVI Health and Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $3,024,675
9 AVI Health and Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $456,331
10 BC Yukon Association of Drug War Survivors 2021-09-24 $380,365
11 Bell Island Sobriety, Housing and Employment Inc. 2021-09-24 $626,575
12 Belleville and Quinte West Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $937,491
13 Black Coalition for AIDS Prevention of Metropolitan Toronto 2021-09-24 $321,516
14 Blood Ties Four Directions Centre Society 2021-09-24 $257,368
15 Board of Education of School District No. 62 (Sooke) 2021-09-24 $120,930
16 Burnaby Family Life Institute 2021-09-24 $135,029
17 Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance 2021-09-24 $597,488
18 Canadian AIDS Treatment Information Exchange 2021-09-24 $322,410
19 Canadian Apprenticeship Forum 2021-09-24 $629,590
20 Canadian Association of People Who Use Drugs 2021-03-17 $1,665,761
21 Canadian Mental Health Association Waterloo Wellington Branch 2021-09-24 163,775
22 Cape Breton Association of People Empowering Drug Users 2021-09-24 $492,229
23 Centre for ADD/ADHD Awareness Canada 2021-09-24 $183,890
24 Centre for Addiction and Mental Health 2021-09-24 $2,251,794
25 Centre for Addiction and Mental Health 2021-09-24 $841,212
26 Centre for Effective Practice 2021-06-17 $895,288
27 Centre of Excellence for Women’s Health 2021-06-16 $708,129
28 Centretown Community Health Centre Inc. 2021-09-24 $1,353,365
29 Christie Ossington Neighbourhood Centre 2021-09-24 $380,845
30 CHUM / Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse - Quebec-Atlantic 2021-09-24
$1,595,777
31 Community Justice Initiatives (Waterloo Region Crime Prevention Council) 2021-06-18 $378,763
32 Community-Based Research Centre Society 2021-06-17 $434,533
33 Comox Bay Care Society 2021-09-24 $140,000
34 Connective Support Society 2021-09-24 $144,429
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
35 Covenant Health 2021-09-24 $957,069
36 CUPS Calgary Society 2021-09-24 $1,213,961
37 Dalhousie University (Solutions for Kids in Pain) 2021-09-24 $613,062
38 Dan's Legacy Foundation 2021-09-24 $2,505,185
39 Digital Public Square 2021-09-24 $1,343,704
40 Downtown Eastside Women’s Centre Association 2021-09-24 $144,429
41 Dr. Peter AIDS Foundation (Canadian Aboriginal AIDS Network) 2021-06-15 $1,891,529
42 Elizabeth Fry Society of Ottawa 2021-09-24 $884,371
43 Elizabeth Fry Society of Peterborough 2021-09-24 $432,820
44 First Light St. John's Friendship Centre 2021-09-24 $375,688
45 Fort McMurray 468 First Nation 2021-09-24 $740,359
46 Fraser House Society 2021-09-24 $294,808
47 Georgian Bay Native Women's Association 2021-09-24 $374,827
48 Gitpo Spirit Lodge 2021-09-24 $1,193,514
49 Go-Give Project 2021-09-24 $938,417
50 Grand River Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $792,148
51 Grey Bruce Health Services 2021-09-24 $1,950,806
52 Hamilton Police Service 2021-09-24 $207,561
53 Hamilton Urban Core Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $2,476,623
54 Hamsmart Community Health Collective 2021-09-24 $428,100
55 Inner City Family Health Team 2021-09-24 $992,114
56 Jean Tweed Treatment Centre 2021-09-24 $805,534
57 Kainai Food Bank Society 2021-09-24 $1,155,145
58 Kee Tas Kee Now Tribal Council 2021-09-24 $148,809
59 Lawson Research Institute 2021-09-24 $509,376
60 L'Espoir de la Femme Immigrante 2021-09-24 $258,736
61 Lift Community Services of Qathet Society 2021-09-24 $295,735
62 Lookout Housing and Health Society 2021-09-24 $824,766
63 Main Street Project 2021-09-24 $802,096
64 Manitoba Metis Federation 2021-09-24 $1,917,838
65 McMaster University (Michael G. DeGroote National Pain Centre) 2021-09-24 $636,973
66 Memorial University of Newfoundland and Labrador 2021-09-24 $282,840
67 Métis Nation British Columbia 2021-09-24 $374,716
68 Mi’kmaw Native Friendship Society 2021-06-16 $380,978
69 Mi’kmaw Native Friendship Society 2021-09-24 $292,440
70 Mi’kmaw Native Friendship Society 2021-09-24 $958,317
71 Midaynta Community Services 2021-09-24 $484,518
72 Native Child and Family Services of Toronto 2021-09-24 $474,272
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
73 Native Women's Association of Canada 2021-09-24 $534,760
74 Neighbourhood Group Community Services 2021-09-24 $1,236,700
75 Nipissing First Nation Indian Band 2021-09-24 $386,606
76 Nisga'a Ts'amiks Vancouver Society 2021-09-24 $329,316
77 Northeast Addiction and Mental Health Centre for Holistic Recovery 2021-09-24 $729,001
78 Northern Network of Peers for Equality 2021-09-24 $577,211
79 Northreach Society 2021-09-24 $1,835,450
80 Norwest Community Health Centres 2021-09-24 $2,022,250
81 Operation Come Home 2021-09-24 $359,396
82 Options Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $2,579,088
83 Ottawa Hospital Research Institute 2021-09-24 $1,254,264
84 P.E.E.R.S. Alliance Inc. 2021-09-24 $430,818
85 Pacifica Treatment Centre Society 2021-09-24 $674,828
86 Pain BC Society 2021-09-24 $522,244
87 Patient/Client & Family Council 2021-09-24 $229,636
88 Persons Living With AIDS Network of Saskatchewan Inc. 2021-09-24 $125,991
89 Peterborough AIDS Resource Network 2021-09-24 $540,342
90 PHS Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $1,149,012
91 Possibilities Recovery Center Inc. 2021-09-24 $696,441
92 St. John Ambulance 2021-09-24 $872,455
93 Providence Health Care Research Institute Trust 2021-09-24 $667,527
94 Providence Health Care Society (BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS) 2021-09-24
$2,116,854
95 Providing Advocacy Counseling and Education Society 2021-09-24 $378,266
96 R.E.C.A.P. Health Services Inc 2021-09-24 $678,190
97 Reach Out Chatham-Kent Missions 2021-09-24 $710,969
98 Regional Essential Access to Connected Healthcare, Niagara Inc. 2021-09-24 $1,513,594
99 Research St. Joseph's - Hamilton 2021-09-24 $1,235,383
100 Réseau ACCESS Network 2021-09-24 $751,643
101 Royal Alexandra Hospital Foundation 2021-09-24 $1,894,417
102 Royal Alexandra Hospital Foundation 2021-06-17 $1,132,197
103 Sacred Circle Indigenous Wellness Society 2021-09-24 $1,963,855
104 SafeLink Alberta Society 2021-09-24 $129,190
105 Salvus Clinic Inc. 2021-09-24 $793,163
106 Sanguen Health Centre Foundation 2021-09-24 $325,511
107 Saskatchewan Fetal Alcohol Support Network Inc. 2021-09-24 $873,750
108 Schizophrenia Society of Canada 2021-09-24 $978,000
109 Sea to Sky Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $873,039
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
110 Selkirk First Nation 2021-09-24 $1,749,111
111 Sexuality Education Resource Centre Manitoba Inc. 2021-09-24 $275,025
112 Sherbourne Health Centre Corporation 2021-09-24 $1,049,329
113 Simon Fraser University 2021-09-24 $592,157
114 Simon Fraser University 2021-09-24 $472,235
115 Six Nations of the Grand River 2021-09-24 $454,122
116 Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada 2021-09-24 $526,134
117 South East Grey Community Health Center 2021-09-24 $472,832
118 South Okanagan Women In Need Society 2021-09-24 $341,322
119 South Riverdale Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $472,043
120 Southeast Resource Development Council Corp. 2021-09-24 $782,201
121 Squamish Helping Hands Society 2021-09-24 $785,762
122 St. Boniface Hospital 2021-09-24 $135,000
123 St. Boniface Street Links 2021-09-24 $399,828
124 St. Paul's Foundation of Vancouver 2021-09-24 $433,416
125 St. Paul's Foundation of Vancouver 2021-09-24 $831,170
126 STC Health and Family Services Inc 2021-09-24 $3,238,943
127 Stonehenge Therapeutic Community 2021-09-24 $256,204
128 Stoney Trail Wellness Center Eden Valley 2021-09-24 $1,400,040
129 Sts’ailes 2021-09-24 $488,288
130 Students Commission of Canada 2021-09-24 $410,075
131 Sunshine House Inc. 2021-09-24 $458,065
132 The AIDS Network (TAN) 2021-09-24 $759,164
133 Tl'oondih Healing Society 2021-09-24 $205,361
134 Trellis HIV & Community Care (HIV/AIDS Regional Services) 2021-09-24 $1,337,264
135 Unity Health Toronto 2021-06-17 $854,439
136 Unity Health Toronto 2021-09-24 $257,452
137 University Health Network 2021-09-24 $1,658,354
138 University of British Columbia 2021-09-24 $748,328
139 University of British Columbia 2021-09-24 $1,380,237
140 University of British Columbia 2021-06-16 $443,262
141 University of Toronto 2021-09-24 $470,027
142 University of Victoria (Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research) 2021-06-17
$3,282,356
143 University of Victoria (Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research) (CAPE) 2021-06-17
$1,962,869
144 University of Western Ontario 2021-09-24 $1,995,775
145 Vasantham - A Tamil Seniors Wellness Centre Inc. 2021-09-24 $188,374
146 Wanasah - Mental Health Services for Black Youth 2021-09-24 $340,439
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
147 West Broadway Development Corporation 2021-09-24 $134,360
148 Wings of Power Inc. 2021-09-24 $137,537
149 Women's Hostels Inc 2021-09-24 $620,701
150 World Spine Care - Canada 2021-09-24 $580,369
151 Wyndham House Inc. 2021-09-24 $1,247,203
152 YMCA of Greater Toronto 2021-09-24 $1,325,154
TOTAL: $125,515,889
Fiscal Year 2022-2023
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
1 Alberta Community Council on HIV 2022-07-04 $4,000,000
2 Centre for Addiction and Mental Health 2022-08-08 $1,199,492
3 Coalition of Substance Users of the North Society 2022-06-02 $457,204
4 Unity Health Toronto - Providence St. Joseph’s and St. Michael’s Healthcare (St. Michael's
Hospital - Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute) 2022-10-27 $2,000,000
TOTAL: $7,656,696
Fiscal Year 2023-2024
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
1 Simon Fraser University (Canadian Drug Policy Coalition) 2023-05-05 $1,888,000
TOTAL: $1,888,000
SUAP Funding Summary – Other Levels of Government
Fiscal Year 2021-2022
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
Provincial
1 Government of Newfoundland and Labrador 2021-09-24 $1,287,605
SUBTOTAL: $1,287,605
Provincial (Health Authorities)
2 Alberta Health Services 2021-09-24 $1,146,909
3 Alberta Health Services 2021-09-24 $196,754
4 Eastern Regional Health Authority (NL) 2021-09-24 $192,572
5 Eastern Regional Health Authority (NL) 2021-09-24 $335,422
6 Fraser Health Authority 2021-09-24 $519,768
7 Fraser Health Authority 2021-09-24 $147,613
8 Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $595,175
9 Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $290,500
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
10 Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $293,400
11 Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $170,500
12 Provincial Health Services Authority (BC) 2021-09-24 $1,734,844
13 Saskatchewan Health Authority 2021-09-24 $1,719,392
14 Shared Health (Manitoba) 2021-09-24 $1,108,693
SUBTOTAL: $8,451,542
Territorial
15 Government of the Northwest Territories 2021-09-24 $2,981,602
16 Government of Yukon 2021-09-24 $78,693
17 Government of Yukon 2021-09-24 $361,238
SUBTOTAL: $3,421,533
Regional
18 Nunatsiavut Government 2021-09-24 $274,149
19 Four Arrows Regional Health Authority 2021-09-24 $1,539,032
20 Vancouver Coastal Health Authority 2021-09-24 $1,172,775
SUBTOTAL: $2,985,956
Municipal
21 City of Hamilton 2021-09-24 $287,551
22 City of Kelowna 2021-09-24 $754,438
23 City of Surrey 2021-09-24 $505,205
24 Hamlet of Pangnirtung 2021-09-24 $172,011
SUBTOTAL: $1,719,205
TOTAL: $15,154,034
Fiscal Year 2022-2023
Nil
Fiscal Year 2023-2024
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
Provincial
1 Government of Quebec N/A $58,198,973
SUBTOTAL: $58,198,973
TOTAL: 58,198,973
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-2190 BY
Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake) DATE
December 13, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Health
Signed by the Honourable Mark Holland
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to meetings involving the government about safe supply, safer supply, pharmaceutical
alternatives to the toxic, illegal or illicit drug supply, pharmaceutical grade medication as an alternative
to the toxic, illegal or illicit drug supply, and medications for substance use disorder and to provide
pharmaceutical alternatives to the contaminated illegal or illicit drug supply: what are the details of
meetings over the last five years between government and pharmaceutical companies, government and
opioid manufacturers, government and lobby companies, and government and stakeholders, including,
for each, the (i) date, (ii) location, (iii) type and purpose of the meeting, (iv) names of the organizations
represented, (v) names and titles of the individuals in attendance, including both government officials
and other attendees?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Producing a comprehensive response to this question required the manual collection and analysis of a
significant volume of information. In the time allotted, and considering the broad scope of the request,
the below reflects the best and most complete information available at the time of the search.
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented
(v) Participants
December 8, 2023
Virtual
Type: stakeholder meeting
Purpose: opportunity to hear from stakeholder
British Columbia Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU)
Representative from BCCSU
Carol Anne Chenard (Director General)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
December 5, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: opportunity to hear from stakeholder
Ottawa Hospital Substance Use Program
Physician from Ottawa Hospital
Carol Anne Chenard (Director General)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
November 29, 2023
Virtual
Type: Presentation
Purpose: present findings from research “Safer Opioid supply: A rapid review of the evidence”
Ontario Drug Policy Research Network (ODPRN)
Representatives from ODPRN
Representatives from Health Canada including Julie Hartleib (Director), and a number of managers and
analysts
October 31,2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss work by BCCSU and BC Provincial Health Officer on prescribed safer supply
British Columbia Centre for Substance Use (BCCSU)
Eric Costen (HC – Associate Deputy Minister)
Kendal Weber (HC – Assistant Deputy Minister)
Jennifer Saxe (HC – Associate Assistant Deputy Minister)
Dr. Theresa Tam (Public Health Agency of Canada – Chief Public Health Officer)
Provincial Health Officer
Representatives from BCCSU
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented
(v) Participants
October 16,2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: to discuss research and evaluation of safer supply
Centre on Drug Policy Evaluation (CDPE)
Representative from CDPE
Sheri Todd (Director General)
Tammy Simpson (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Representative from Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
September 18, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Update on research work, including opioid use disorder guidance, safer supply, prevention
Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM)
Eric Costen (HC – Associate Deputy Minister)
Kendal Weber (HC – Assistant Deputy Minister)
Jennifer Saxe (HC – Associate Assistant Deputy Minister)
Representatives from CIHR
Officials from CRISM
September 15, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work to create a facility to manufacture pharmaceutical
substances.
Fair Price Pharma
Representatives from Fair Price Pharma
Participation from Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry’s Office
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
September 12, 2023
In Person
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To visit the site and discuss the services provided.
London InterCommunity Health Centre
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
August 29, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Introductory meeting
Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives of Moms Stop the Harm
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
August 28, 2023
In Person
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Opportunity to hear from stakeholders
NorWest Community Health Centres
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Stephen Lucas, Health Canada
August 9,2023
In Person
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To learn about their SAFER (Safer Alternative for Emergency Response) program
PHS Community Services Society
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Eric Costen, Health Canada
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
August 9, 2023
In Person
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about Hope to Health’s approach to care, including safer supply and primary care
BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Eric Costen
Representatives from the BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
July 25, 2023
Virtual
Type: Roundtable meeting
Purpose: To discuss their policy brief, “Innovating Beyond Exclusively Medicalized Approaches”
Canadian Civil Society Advancing Safe Supply Working Group
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from Health Canada
Representative from the Harm Reduction Nurses Association
Representative from Moms Stop the Harm
Representative from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Representative from Boyle Street Community Services Society
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented
(v) Participants
July 4, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
Fair Price Pharma
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
June 13,2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the Prescribed Safer Supply Emerging Evidence Brief
National Safer Supply Community of Practice
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representative from Parkdale Queen West Community Health Centre
Representative from South Riverdale Community Health Centre
Representative from the London InterCommunity Health Centre
Representative from the Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research
Representative from the National Safer Supply Community of Practice
Shannon Nix, Health Canada
Local Members of Parliament
June 8, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: to discuss the status of their work
British Columbia Centre for Disease Control (BCCDC)
Representatives from BCCDC
Jen Saxe (DG)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
May 31,2022
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
Fair Price Pharma
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
May 30, 2023
In Person
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To meet with Moms Stop the Harm members visiting Ottawa
Moms Stop the Harm
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Representatives from Moms Stop the Harm
May 18, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Follow up meeting
Moms Stop the Harm
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Shannon Nix – Health Canada Associate ADM
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented Participants
May 16, 2022 Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
Fair Price Pharma
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
May 10,2023
Virtual
Type: Virtual Exchange Forum
Purpose: To discuss an “Evaluation of Harm Reduction Approaches to Address the Opioid Crisis in the
Context of COVID-19 – Safer Supply Evaluation”
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Representatives from CIHR
Representatives from Health Canada
Researchers and safer supply service providers
April 24, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss safer supply
London InterCommunity Health Centre
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from London InterCommunity Health Centre
February 16, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
Fair Price Pharma
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
February 15, 2023
In Person
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about Pathways to Recovery’s safer supply program
Pathways to Recovery
Safer Supply Ottawa
Recovery Care
Options Bytown
Ottawa Inner City Health
Somerset West Community Health Centre
Respect Rx
Sandy Hill Community Health Centre
Ottawa Public Health
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Former President of the Treasury Board
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. ADM)
Representative from Pathways to Recovery
Representatives from Recovery Care
Representatives from Options Bytown
Representatives from Safer Supply Ottawa
Representative from Ottawa Inner City Health
Representatives from Somerset West Community Health Centre
Representative from Respect Rx
Representative from Sandy Hill Community Health Centre
Representatives from Ottawa Public Health
February 10, 2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss LIHC’s safer supply project
London InterCommunity Health Centre
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from London InterCommunity Health Centre
Local Member of Parliament
Shannon Nix, Health Canada
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented
(v) Participants
February 2,2023
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss SUAP safer supply projects.
Parkdale Queen West Community Health Centre
South Riverdale Community Health Centre
London InterCommunity Health Centre
National Safer Supply Community of Practice
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Local Member of Parliament
Parkdale Queen West Community Health
South Riverdale Community Health Centre
London InterCommunity Health Centre
National Safer Supply Community of Practice
January 12,2023
In Person
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about the Tablet Injectable Opioid Agonist Therapy (TiOAT) service in Cowichan
Valley
Island Health
Lookout Health and Housing Society
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
Representatives from Island Health
Representatives from Lookout Health and Housing Society
January 11,2023
In Person
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about Hope to Health’s approach to care, including safer supply and primary care
BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. ADM)
Representatives from the BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
November 22, 2022
November 8, 2022
October 27, 2022
Virtual
Type: Knowledge Exchange Series (KES) on Safer Supply
Purpose: To hear from a range of participants on the current evidence and knowledge around safer
supply, share experiences of what is or is not working well, and discuss how current research and
knowledge can be used to design new models and services while reducing risks or unintended results
from these programs.
Expert Advisory Group on Safer Supply (EAG)
Federal-Provincial- Territorial Committee on Substance Use
Canadian Centre for Substance Use and Addiction (CCSA)
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions (attended Oct 27 and Nov 22)
Range of invited presenters, panellists, and participants, including researchers, safer supply prescribers
and clients, national drug policy organizations, and PWLLE
A number of observers also attended from Health Canada's Expert Advisory Group on Safer Supply, the
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Committee on Substance Use, CCSA, Indigenous Services Canada, and the
Canadian Institutes for Health Research.
October 6, 2022
Virtual
Type: Follow-up discussion
BC Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU)
Jennifer Saxe (HC-Director General)
Purpose: To discuss ongoing work by the BCCSU related to models of medication distribution for those at
risk of overdose in BC.
Carol Anne Chenard (HC- Director)
Sheri Todd (HC-DG)
Tammy Simpson (HC- Director)
Cesare Spadaccini (HC – Manager)
Anna Roberts (HC – Manager)
Representative from BCCSU
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented
(v) Participants
September 14, 2022
Virtual
Type: Follow-up meeting with pharmaceutical company
Purpose: To discuss diacetylmorphine availability in Canada
Pharmascience
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Jennifer Novak (Executive Director)
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Michele Musgrove (Manager)
Representatives from Pharmascience
August 30, 2022
Virtual
Type: Roundtable
Purpose: To discuss overdose prevention in Canada and Australia
Pennington Institute
Ottawa Inner City Health
Representative from the Senate
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from the Pennington Institute
Representative from Ottawa Inner City Health
Representatives from health Canada: Shannon Nix (As Assistant Deputy Minister); Jennifer Saxe (Director
General); Peggy Ainslie (Director)
August 29. 2022
Virtual
Type: Roundtable
Purpose: Follow up to meeting on July 27, 2022.
Moms Stop the Harm
Canadian Association of People Who Use Drugs
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Representative from Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Representative from VANDU
Representative from DULF
Representative from the Harm Reduction Nurses Association
Representatives from health Canada: Shannon Nix (AsADM); Jennifer Saxe (DG); Peggy Ainslie (Director)
July 27, 2022
Virtual Type: Roundtable
Purpose: Follow up meeting to the Non- Medicalized Safe Supply Roundtable on March 10, 2022
Moms Stop the Harm
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Prairie Harm Reduction
VANDU
DULF
Harm Reduction Nurses Association Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Representative from Prairie Harm Reduction
Representatives from the Canadian Association of People Who Use Drugs (CAPUD)
Representative from VANDU
Representative from DULF
Representative from the Harm
Reduction Nurses Association
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented
(v) Participants
June 27, 2022
Virtual
Type: Follow-up meeting with pharmaceutical company
Purpose: To discuss diacetylmorphine availablity in Canada
Pharmascience
Jennifer Saxe (Director General
Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Jennifer Novak (Executive Director)
Carol Anne Chenard HC- (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Representatives from Pharmascience
June 17, 2022
Virtual
Type: Follow-up discussion
Purpose: To discuss ongoing work by the BCCSU related to models of medication distribution for those at
risk of overdose in BC.
BC Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU)
Jennifer Saxe (Director General
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Sheri Todd (Director General)
Tammy Simpson (Director)
Anna Roberts (Manager)
Representative from BCCSU
April 19, 2022
In Person
Type: Stakeholder Meeting
Purpose: To visit the site and discuss the services provided.
London InterCommunity Health Centre
Not available
April 11, 2022
Virtual
Type: Follow-up discussion
Purpose: To discuss a request for an S. 56 exemption for a safe supply fulfillment centre and compassion
club.
Drug User Liberation Front (DULF)
Vancouver Area Network of Drug Users (VANDU)
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Anna Roberts (Manager)
Representative from DULF
Representatives from VANDU
April 9, 2022
In Person
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To learn about their SAFER Initiative
AVI Health and Community Services SAFER Initiative
Representatives from AVI Health and Community Services
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister )
April 8, 2022
In Person
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Introductory meeting
PHS Community Services Society
Representatives from PHS Community Services Society
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented
(v) Participants
April 8, 2022
In Person
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To see a machine and hear about MySafe’s work.
MySafe
Representatives from MySafe
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
March 10, 2022
Virtual
Type: Ministerial Roundtable with Moms Stop the Harm and the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Purpose: To better understand the drivers for safer supply, potential risks related to different service
provision models and which have proven to be most effective, and remaining barriers to expanding the
most effective models for safer supply.
Moms Stop the Harm
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Former Parliamentary Secretary to former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions Office
Representatives from Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
March 2, 2022
Virtual
Type: Webinar
Purpose: To deliver remarks at the Canadian Pharmacists Association Webinar on Safer Supply
Canadian Pharmacists Association
Members of the Canadian Pharmacists Association
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
February 23, 2022
Virtual
Type: Ministerial Roundtable with Expert Advisory Body
Purpose: To better understand the drivers for safer supply, potential risks related to different service
provision models and which have proven to be most effective, and remaining barriers to expanding the
most effective models for safer supply.
Expert Advisory Group on Safer Supply (EAG)
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Participant from the Prime Minister’s Office
Former Parliamentary Secretary to Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Representatives from the Government of British Columbia, including the Honourable Sheila Malcolmson
Health Canada: Jennifer Saxe (Director General), Jennifer Pelley (Director), Julie Hartlieb (Director), Sheri
Todd (Director General), Ian Hodges (Manager), Saskia Vanderloo (Policy Analyst), Rachel Joyce Hayton
(Policy Analyst)
EAG members
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented
(v) Participants
February 22, 2022
Virtual Type: Meeting with pharmaceutical company
Purpose: To discuss diacetylmorphine availability in Canada
Pharmascience
Jen Saxe (Director General)
Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Jennifer Novak (Executive Director)
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Representatives from Pharmascience
February 3, 2022
Virtual
Type: Health Canada People with Lived and Living Experience (PWLLE) Council Meeting with Minister
Bennett
Purpose: For the Minister to meet the members of Health Canada’s PWLLE Council and learn more about
their priorities as outlined in a Discussion Paper, one of which is diversification of Safe Supply.
PWLLE represent themselves and not their organization as Council Members.
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
PWLLE Council Members
Health Canada participants, including: Kendal Weber (Assistant Deputy Minister), Shannon Nix, (As.
Assistant Deputy Minister), Jennifer Novak (Executive Director), Sheri Todd (Director General), Jennifer
Saxe (Director General), Tammy Simpson (Director), Jennifer Pelley (Director)
December 6, 2021
Virtual
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To learn more about iOAT and work of Dr. Peter Centre
Dr Peter Centre
Jennifer Saxe (HC-Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (HC- Director)
Jennifer Pelley (HC – Director)
Representatives from Dr. Peter Centre
November 18, 2021
Virtual
Type: Meeting with Canadian Pharmacist Association
Purpose: To discuss role of pharmacists in safer supply
Canadian Pharmacist Association (CPHA)
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Jo-Ann Purcell (HC – Director)
Representatives from CPHA
February 15, 2021
Virtual
Type: Meeting with Stakeholder
Purpose: Introductory meeting Canadian Association for Safe Supply (CASS)
Jennifer Saxe (HC - Director General)
Michelle Boudreau (HC - Director General)
Representative from CASS
February 5, 2021
Virtual
Type: Webinar
Purpose: To provide an overview of the 6 national guidance documents developed by the Canadian
Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) that address the urgent needs of people who use
substances, as well as service providers and decision makers during the COVID-19 pandemic. Other rapid
response projects related to substance use and COVID- 19 were also discussed, such as the qualitative
survey of the impact of COVID-19 on People with Living Experience of Drug Use.
Representatives from a range of organizations, including:
Provinces and Territories
Federal departments and agencies
Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse(CRISM)
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Representative from CRISM
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Bruna Brands (HC - Senior Science Advisor)
Representatives from provincial and territorial governments
An invitation to this webinar was extended to nearly 400 individuals and there was no record of
attendance. As such we cannot confirm the number or
names of participants.
(i) Date
(ii) Location (virtual/in-person)
(iii) Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
(iv) Names of Organizations Represented
(v) Participants
January 11, 2021
Virtual Type: Meeting with Stakeholder
Purpose: To discuss work by the BCCSU related to models of medication distribution for those at risk of
overdose in BC.
British Columbia Centre for Substance Use (BCCSU)
Eric Costen (HC – AsADM)
Jennifer Saxe (HC-Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (HC- Director)
Jennifer Novak (HC – Executive Director)
Tammy Simpson (HC- Director)
Representative from BCCSU
April 26, 2021
January 20, 2022
January 26, 2022
January 31, 2022
June 16, 2022
October 18, 2022
November 4, 2022
November 11, 2022
Virtual
Type: Meeting with Stakeholder
Purpose: To discuss regulatory pathways regarding diacetylmorphine
Fair Price Pharma
Representatives from Fair Price Pharma
Representatives from Health Canada (Jennifer Saxe, Director General, Carol Anne Chenard, Director)
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO
Q-2204 BY
Mr. Davies (Vancouver Kingsway) DATE
December 14, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the federal tobacco control strategy for fiscal year 2022-23: (a) what was the budget for
the strategy; (b) how much of that budget was spent within each fiscal year; (c) how much was spent on
each component of the strategy, specifically (i) mass media, (ii) policy and regulatory development, (iii)
research, (iv) surveillance, (v) enforcement, (vi) grants and contributions, (vii) programs for Indigenous
Canadians; (d) were any other activities not listed in (c) funded by the strategy, and, if so, how much was
spent on each of these activities; and (e) was part of the budget reallocated for purposes other than
tobacco control, and, if so, how much was reallocated?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Since Q-2204 will be tabled in March, a response from Health Canada has not been received yet.
Public Health Agency of Canada
Since Q-2204 will be tabled in March, a response from PHAC has not been received yet.
