Created: 2024-01-31T18:51:39.994095
Name: Compliance_Verification_Project_2021-2022:_Electrical_Extension_Cords_and_Power_Bars
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/compliance-verification-project-2021-2022-electrical-extension-cords-power-bars.html
Package ID: e7d4a251-d443-4d98-a8a8-9ffd13d56e7f
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'CCPSA', 'compliance verification project', 'compliance of electrical-extension', 'cords and power-bars', 'recognized Canadian certification']
Notes: The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance through documentation review of electrical extension cords and power bars that have a recognized Canadian certification mark with the requirements of paragraph 9 (b) and section 10 of the CCPSA.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Electrical Extension Cords and Power Bars - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Electrical Extension Cords and Power Bars Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report Fiscal Year 2021-2022 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance through documentation review of electrical extension cords and power bars that have a recognized Canadian certification mark with the requirements of paragraph 9 (b) and section 10 of the CCPSA. All electrical products that plug into an electrical outlet, including electrical extension cords and power bars, are required to be certified to the applicable Canadian national safety standard to comply with provincial and territorial legislation. That certification must be from an accredited certification body (CB) and the certified product must carry the recognized certification mark of that CB. Paragraph 9 (b) of the CCPSA prohibits the packaging or labelling of a consumer product in a manner that is false, misleading or deceptive regarding its certification related to its safety or its compliance with a safety standard or the regulations. Section 10 of the CCPSA prohibits the advertising or sale of a consumer product that is known to be advertised, packaged or labelled in a manner referred to in section 9. A product that is labelled with a recognized certification mark that is not supported by a review of certification documents obtained from the company or authorized by the certification body is deemed to be non-compliant with paragraph 9 (b) and potentially section 10. For this project, compliance of select products to paragraph 9 (b) and section 10 of the CCPSA was determined through a sampling and evaluation process by which Health Canada inspectors sampled relevant products from establishments either in-person or online. Health Canada inspectors verified compliance to paragraph 9 (b) and section 10 of the CCPSA after visual inspection of the product for the presence of a recognized Canadian certification mark, reviewing certification documents provided by establishments, and verifying records either after review of the CB's product listing website or contacting the CB directly. Prior to initiating inspections, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of electrical extension cord and power bar retailers, importers and distributors in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of establishments. Over the course of the 2021 to 2022 fiscal year, evaluation of 50 different products was carried out. The evaluation resulted in 11 products that required further certification validation from the CB after inspectors identified inconsistencies on the CB website and/or from the certification documents provided by establishments. Of those 11 products: 7 products were confirmed by the CB as having valid certification. 1 product was determined to be non-compliant to paragraph 9 (b) of the CCPSA, misleading claims, due to being labelled as certified in Canada, yet only having certification for the United States. A voluntary commitment was obtained with the responsible establishment. 2 products were identified as having certification file clerical issues and were referred to the CB, non-compliance to paragraph 9 (b) or section 10 of CCPSA was not determined for these products. 1 product sampled online did not have a recognized certification mark upon delivery; however, the establishment provided certification documentation upon request and the CB confirmed the product as having authentic Canadian certification. For this product, non-compliance to paragraph 9 (b) or section 10 of CCPSA was not determined. There were 46 instances in which no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action(s) Addtam Surge Protector Power Bar Amazon.ca Product did not have a recognized certification mark, but claim on product states certification to standards. CB confirmed valid certification. No compliance issues detected. Commitment by Addtam Amazon Basics 6-outlet Surge Protector Power Bar Amazon.ca No compliance issues detected None APC APC Performance SurgeArrest, 12 Outlets with 2 USB Charging Ports Costco Wholesale Canada No compliance issues detected None BlueDiamond Expanded Basic Powerbar 6 Outlets/4-ft Cord Memory Express No compliance issues detected None Compucessory 6-outlet Power Strip 15 inch cord Novexco/Hamster No compliance issues detected None CO-OP Gold CO-OP Gold Block Heater Extension Cord CO-OP Home & Agro Centre No compliance issues detected None ECG ECG 8 Outlet Surge Protector B&E Electronics No compliance issues detected None Eclipse Pro Eclipse Pro Power Bar 8 Outlet W/Surge 2 Ft Chateau Electronic No compliance issues detected None Eclipse Pro Eclipse Pro Extension Cord - 15 Ft Orange Chateau Electronic No compliance issues detected None Electryx Electryx Light Duty 6' Indoor Extension Cord Peavey Mart No compliance issues detected None elink elink Power Bar with Surge Protection Giant Tiger Stores Ltd. No compliance issues detected None elink elink Surge Protection Power Strip 6 outlets HRS Global No compliance issues detected None Exponent High Impact Plastic Surge Protector Exponent No compliance issues detected None Globe Globe 4 3' outlets with 2 USB Port Power Bar Globe Electric No compliance issues detected None Globe Designer™ Globe Designer™ Fabric Covered Extension Cord Globe Electric No compliance issues detected None GO ON GO ON 6-Outlet Metal Power Bar, 2-ft, White Giant Tiger Stores Ltd. No compliance issues detected None Homebase Homebase Block Heater Extension Cord Homebase No compliance issues detected None Incipio Incipio CommandKit Smart Power Strip Addison Electronics CB stated the certification mark is unauthorized due to clerical issues. No compliance issues detected. Referred to certification body Insignia Insignia 4-outlet surge protector Best Buy Canada No compliance issues detected None Kensington-SmartSocket Kensington SmartSockets Premium Adaptor Surge Protector Acco Brands Canada Inc. No compliance issues detected None KOPPLA KOPPLA 5 outlet power strip & 2 USB ports, white IKEA Canada Ltd. Partnership No compliance issues detected None Mastercraft Mastercraft 6-Outlet Contractor Power Bar Canadian Tire No compliance issues detected None MDE 6-ft Extension Cord Dollar Tree Stores Canada No compliance issues detected None Mode Electronics Mode Electronics 6 Outlet Power Strip with Surge Suppression B&E Electronics Certification mark unauthorized by the certification body for Canadian certification. Determined non-compliant to the misleading claims prohibitions of the CCPSA. Commitment by B&E Electronics Monster Monster Essentials Power Strip Surge Protector, 12AC Outlet GB Micro Electronics Inc. No compliance issues detected None No brand 10-ft Indoor Cord Kent Building Supplies No compliance issues detected None No brand 15-ft Indoor Cord (3 pack) Kent Building Supplies No compliance issues detected None NOMA NOMA 6-Outlet Power Bar with Dual USB Outlets Canadian Tire No compliance issues detected None PDI Accessories 15-ft 3 Outlet Indoor Extension Cord Bargain Basket No compliance issues detected None PDI Accessories Power Surge Protector 3 Outlet Bargain Basket No compliance issues detected None PowerFist PowerFist 3m Extension Cord Princess Auto Ltd. No compliance issues detected None Prime 6 Outlet Power Strip, 3-ft cord, Down Angle Plug, White Infinite Cables Inc. No compliance issues detected None Prime 6-ft landscape extension cord Lee's Electronics No compliance issues detected None Pro Glo 25-ft 14/3 SJTW 40F Lighted Extension Cord United Farmers Association No compliance issues detected None Pro Point Pro Point 50-ft 12/3 Single-end Extension Cord Princess Auto No compliance issues detected None ProGlo 12/3 SJTW 50 feet extension cord KMS Tool & Equipment No compliance issues detected None PureVolt PureVolt 6 Outlet Power Bar with LED Lights and 2 USB Ports Addison Electronics No compliance issues detected None SHOPRO Professional SHOPRO Block Heater Extension Cord 16/3, 3 Outlet SHOPRO Professional CB stated the certification mark is unauthorized due to clerical issues. No compliance issues detected. Referred to certification body Solid Fire 3 Pack 6-ft Extension Cords Uncle Weiner's Wholesale No compliance issues detected None Stanley Stanley PowerMax Compact 8-Outlet Power Strip Wal-Mart Canada No compliance issues detected None Staples Staples 6-Outlet Grounded Power Strip, 6' Cord, White Staples No compliance issues detected None Sunbeam Sunbeam indoor extension cord with foot switch 3 outlets L'Image Home Products Inc. No compliance issues detected None Tripp Lite Tripp Lite Super 7 Surge Protector B&E Electronics No compliance issues detected None Trusted by London Drugs 6-outlet Surge Protector London Drugs Ltd. No compliance issues detected None VITAL VITAL 6-Outlet Power Bar with Surge Protection The Source No compliance issues detected None Westinghouse Westinghouse 1080J USB Surge Protector Wal-Mart Canada No compliance issues detected None Woods WOODS Polar Winterflex Power Cord Home Depot Canada No compliance issues detected None Woods Household Cord 4.5 metres United Farmers Association No compliance issues detected None Xtreme Xtreme 6FT Fabric Extension Cord-White with Black GB Micro Electronics Inc. No compliance issues detected None Xtricity Xtricity Power Strip Multiprise indoor (6 outlets, 6-ft) Les Industries Jessar Inc. No compliance issues detected None Disclaimer: Inspectors apply a systematic bias during the selection of establishments and samples. Inspectors do not select products randomly; instead, they select the ones that are more likely not to meet health and safety requirements due to observed characteristics. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CV projects are very small, Health Canada does not consider the findings of CV projects to reflect overall market compliance, unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria measured in this project. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2023-07-24 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy