Created: 2024-06-13T14:40:36.273458
Name: HESA-An_Act_to_amend_An_Act_to_amend_the_Criminal_Code_(medical_assistance_in_Dying),_No._2
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/e9e6c06e-3562-4129-b3b2-a2d2b7f4bcbb/resource/2a2e6978-6e33-48d5-a12b-3ab03689f107/download/hesa-bill-c-62-proactive-disclosure-eng.pdf
Package ID: e9e6c06e-3562-4129-b3b2-a2d2b7f4bcbb
Keywords: ['HESA', 'MAID', 'Committee']
Notes: Minister Holland's appearance at HESA on Bill- C62.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
An Act to amend An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying), No. 2
Parliamentary Committee Binder
Wednesday, February 14, 2024
An Act to amend An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in Dying), No. 2
Parliamentary Committee Binder
Expected Appearance: Wednesday, February 14, 2024
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Part A: Overview
1. Questions and Answers
2. Technical Deck for the Senate
Part B: QP Notes
3. Medical Assistance in Dying (General)
4. Charter Challenge (Justice Card, to be provided separately)
5. MAID Reporting
6. MAID Curriculum
7. Indigenous Engagement
8. PT Readiness
9. Quebec Legislation
10. Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD)
11. Data and Structural Vulnerability
12. Actions Taken to Improve Access to Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Part C: Background
13. Text of the Bill
14. AMAD’s Third Report
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Healthcare System Preparedness for MAID and Mental Illness
Q.1: What actions has the government taken since March 2023 to prepare for the lifting of the
temporary exclusion of MAID eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness?
Q.2: What is the Canadian MAID Curriculum?
Q.3: What is the Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID) 4
Q.4: What are the provinces and territories saying regarding the March 2024 deadline for the
exclusion of MAID for mental illness?
Purpose of an Extension
Q.5: If we have done so much to prepare, why are you supporting an extension?
Q.6: Why is the Government specifically proposing a three-year extension?
Q.7: This is the second time that the government has extended the exclusion of eligibility to a
specific date. Why not propose an indefinite pause?
Q.8: Why is an additional delay needed given the supports that were identified as necessary by the
Expert Panel and the Special Joint Committee are now in place?
Q.9: Would another one-year extension not be sufficient?
Q.10: Is the federal government considering permanently removing eligibility for persons suffering
solely from a mental illness?
Q.11: Is excluding eligibility for persons whose sole medical condition is mental illness
discriminatory and unconstitutional?
Q.12: Can you respond to criticism that depressed children and teenagers will have greater
capacity to end their own lives under Canada’s new MAID law?
Special Joint Parliamentary Committee on MAID (AMAD) 8
Q.13: What does AMAD’s third report recommend?
Q.14: Why does the Bill not provide a timeline for the parliamentary committee to complete its
review?
Q.15: How do you respond to AMAD’s third report that we are not ready to safely expand MAID to
persons with a mental illness?
Q.16: What is your response to suggestions by some AMAD Senators that the Government should
seek a reference from the Supreme Court on MAID and mental illness?
MAID Monitoring and Reporting
Q.17: How many Track 2 MAID provisions occur each year?
Q.18: How many MAID provisions where mental illness is the sole underlying medical condition do
we expect?
Procedural Safeguards
Q.19: Are there enough safeguards in the law to protect people who might be more vulnerable due
to their social circumstances?
Q.20: What more can we do regarding oversight of MAID to increase the public’s confidence in the
system?
Q.21: Didn’t the QC Commission recently find more non-compliance with the MAID law?
Health and Social Supports
Q.22: Are some Canadians receiving MAID for reasons solely related to lack of support services?
Q.23: What is the Government of Canada doing to address mental health support in Canada?
Perspectives of the Psychiatric Community
Q.24: What were the key conclusions of the Expert Panel on Mental Illness
Q.25: Several psychiatrists have raised concerns with respect to the irremediability of mental
disorders and the need for consensus on when and if a mental disorder can be deemed
“irremediable”. What do you have to say about this?
Q.26: Some psychiatrists have called for clarity on what could be a request for suicide compared
with MAID. How can practitioners make this determination when a mental disorder is driving a
person’s request?
Q.27: Is there a lack of agreement among health care professionals about the appropriateness of
expansion?
Mental Illness
Q.28: What is the difference between mental illness and mental disorder?
Q.29: Is it possible to determine a mental illness is resistant to all treatments?
Q.30: How do you respond to criticism that Canada’s MAID legislation is going against suicide
prevention efforts?
Substance Use
Q.31: Recent media reports have stated that the Government will expand MAID ‘for people addicted
to drugs’ in March 2024. Will MAID be an option for persons with drug addictions?
Indigenous Peoples
Q.32: Will Indigenous communities support the extension of the exclusion?
Q.33: What is the Government doing to engage with Indigenous Peoples on MAID?
Persons with Disabilities
Q.34: How do you respond to advocates for persons with disabilities who are saying that extending
MAID eligibility beyond an end of life regime violates the equality rights and dignity of persons with
disabilities?
Advance Requests for MAID
Q.35: With the interest in advance requests for MAID such as in Quebec and federally through a
Senator’s Bill, are we planning to permit advance requests for MAID?
HEALTHCARE SYSTEM PREPAREDNESS FOR MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
Q.1: What actions has the government taken since March 2023 to prepare for the lifting of the
temporary exclusion of MAID eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness?
The Government of Canada has been working closely with provinces and territories and
stakeholders to support the implementation of the federal MAID regime since its inception. This
includes supporting health system readiness. In preparation for the lifting of the temporary
exclusion of MAID eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness, the Government of
Canada has supported a range of initiatives towards preparedness, guided by the
recommendations from the Expert Panel and the need to protect those who may be vulnerable. This
includes:
Supporting the development of a model MAID Practice Standard and a companion document
Advice to the Profession designed for use by regulatory bodies and clinicians in addressing complex
requests for MAID, including where mental illness is involved (published March 2023);
Working closely with the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and Providers (CAMAP) on a
number of key activities to support preparedness, including the development of a nationally
accredited bilingual MAID curriculum to support a standardised approach to care across the
country, which more than 900 clinicians have already registered for (launched in August 2023, and
all modules now available)
Funding a Knowledge Exchange Workshop that included over 40 MAID practitioners and
psychiatrists from across Canada to discuss roles and contributions to the proper assessment and
management of MAID where mental disorders are involved, and support local training related to
MAID for mental disorders (June 2023)
Strengthening and enhancing existing data collection on MAID by amending the Regulations for the
Monitoring of MAID that require data to be collected with respect to disability, race, and Indigenous
identity (enacted January 1, 2023, with new data to be reported in 2024); and,
Engaging with Indigenous Peoples to better understand their perspectives on MAID (online tool
launched August 17, 2023, with other Indigenous-led and Health Canada-led activities planned for
2024).
Q.2: What is the Canadian MAID Curriculum?
The Canadian MAID Curriculum is the first nationally accredited, bilingual MAID education program
available to licensed physicians and nurse practitioners across the country. Delivered through a
combination of online and in-person learning sessions, the Curriculum includes a series of training
modules to advise and support clinicians in assessing persons who request MAID, including those
with mental illness, complex chronic conditions, or who are impacted by structural vulnerability, as
well as help with the practical application of the MAID legislative framework.
The Curriculum will help achieve a safe and consistent approach to care across Canada and
ensure access to high-quality MAID training for interested health practitioners, regardless of their
level of experience.
To date, over 1,100 physicians and nurse practitioners (including over 130 psychiatrists) have
registered to have access to the curriculum.
Almost 800 clinicians and others have completed at least one of the seven modules, including over
100 clinicians completing modules on MAID assessment and provision and almost 40 completing
the module on MAID and mental disorder. Feedback has been positive.
Since the curriculum was launched in August 2023, 26 facilitated sessions have been offered in six
jurisdictions (AB, BC, NS, ON, QC, and SK) and fifteen sessions still planned in other jurisdictions
(MB, NL, ON, and QC).
Q.3: What is the Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID)?
The Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID) was developed as a resource
for physician and nursing regulatory authorities to adopt or adapt in their development or ongoing
revision of MAID standards. If regulators across provinces and territories choose to draw upon
these resources in the drafting and revising of their own documents, greater consistency in MAID
delivery across jurisdictions may be achieved.
Practice standards are developed and adopted by regulatory bodies responsible for ensuring that
specific groups of health professionals operate within the highest standard of clinical practice and
medical ethics. The majority of physician and nurse regulatory bodies in Canada have adopted a
practice standard or guideline for MAID. Most, but not all, have been updated since the passage of
former Bill C-7. The level of detail in these documents varies by regulatory body: some simply
reiterate the MAID requirements set out in the Criminal Code, while others provide more detailed
guidance.
The Model MAID Practice Standard was drafted while keeping in mind the content of existing MAID
practice standards across provinces and territories. The Model MAID Practice Standard provides
significant additional content applicable to complex cases, including those where the person
requesting MAID suffers from a serious mental disorder.
Q.4: What are the provinces and territories saying regarding the March 2024 deadline for the
exclusion of MAID for mental illness?
While the legislation on MAID is part of the Criminal Code and federal jurisdiction, it is the
provinces and territories that are responsible for its implementation.
Important progress has been made to prepare for MAID eligibility for persons whose sole medical
condition is mental illness. Despite this progress, provinces and territories have asked for a further
delay, to continue federal-provincial-territorial collaboration to ensure a consistent and safe
approach across the country that includes appropriate safeguards.
On January 29, 2024, PT Ministers of Health sent a letter to Minister Holland calling for an indefinite
pause to the implementation of the expansion of the MAID eligibility criteria for persons whose sole
underlying medical condition is a mental illness. While PEI and NS indicated that they are more
prepared than other jurisdictions for the proposed expansion, they supported the request of the
other PTs for additional time to coordinate the implementation of appropriate safeguards, fully
prepare their health workforce, and enact appropriate guidance.
This extension will provide more time for provinces and territories to prepare their health care
systems, including the development of policies, standards, regulations, guidance and additional
resources to assess and provide MAID in situations where a person’s sole underlying medical
condition is a mental illness. It will also provide practitioners with more time to participate in
training and become familiar with available supports, guidelines and standards.
This proposed delay is also in line with the recommendations of the Special Joint Committee on
MAID (AMAD) in their report MAID and Mental Disorders: The Road Ahead, which was tabled on
January 29, 2024. While recognizing that considerable progress has been made in preparing for the
expansion of eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness, AMAD recommended an
additional delay to ensure that the health care system can safely provide MAID in these types of
complex cases.
If pressed about the PTs calling for an indefinite pause:
As is evident from the letter, provinces and territories are at various states of readiness to support
MAID for individuals with mental illness as a sole underlying condition.
They have asked for more time to prepare for the lifting of the exclusion, and the federal government
is prepared to work closely with them to support their readiness for a change in federal law over the
course of the next three years.
PURPOSE OF AN EXTENSION
Q.5: If we have done so much to prepare, why are you supporting an extension?
The legal framework for MAID is set out in the federal Criminal Code, however it is the provinces and
territories who have responsibility for health care delivery, including MAID implementation.
Important progress has been made to prepare for MAID eligibility for persons whose sole medical
condition is mental illness. However, in its consultations with the provinces, territories, medical
professionals, people with lived experience and other stakeholders, the government has heard –
and agrees – that the health system is not yet ready for this expansion.
The Government of Canada recognizes the suffering associated with mental illness can be just as
intolerable as that arising from other types of medical conditions, and has no plans to permanently
prohibit or further delay allowing MAID for persons with a mental illness. However, it is important to
ensure that practitioners are prepared to appropriately evaluate these requests, and health
systems are prepared to manage them.
Q.6: Why is the Government specifically proposing a three-year extension?
The three years will allow for continued collaboration with the provinces and territories on MAID
implementation.
This extension will provide more time for provinces and territories to prepare their health care
systems, including the development of policies, standards, guidance and additional resources to
assess and provide MAID in situations where a person’s sole underlying medical condition is a
mental illness.
It will also provide practitioners with more time to be trained and become familiar with available
supports, guidelines and standards.
The additional time will also allow the federal government to broaden engagement with
stakeholders, especially persons living with a serious mental illness and First Nations, Inuit and
Metis Peoples. This further engagement is important to better understand the perspectives and
needs of these populations, including consideration of any additional safeguards, as the federal
MAID regime continues to evolve.
The three years will also allow the Parliamentary Committee to undertake a comprehensive review
related to MAID eligibility of persons whose sole condition is a mental illness and provide
recommendations.
Q.7: This is the second time that the government has extended the exclusion of eligibility to a
specific date. Why not propose an indefinite pause?
The Government of Canada recognizes that mental illness can cause suffering on par with that of
physical illnesses.
The question is about “when” and not “if”. It is important to establish a firm timeline, otherwise
there is a risk of losing momentum based on the excellent progress and study completed to date.
A three-year extension will provide provinces and territories and partners sufficient time to have
structures and mechanisms in place to safely assess MAID requests where mental illness is the
sole underlying condition.
The extension would also provide practitioners with time to become trained and gain confidence in
applying the guidelines and safeguards.
Q.8: Why is an additional delay needed given the supports that were identified as necessary by the
Expert Panel and the Special Joint Committee are now in place?
Important progress has been made to prepare for MAID eligibility for persons whose sole medical
condition is a mental illness. Significant work has been undertaken to ensure that practitioners
have the necessary professional guidance and training to appropriately assess and provide MAID in
complex cases, including those involving only a mental illness. Given the complex and sensitive
nature of this issue, it is crucial that the public and health care practitioners have confidence in the
regime and awareness of the measures put in place to strengthen its protections.
There has been considerable interest in the MAID curriculum developed by the Canadian
Association of MAID Assessors and Providers (CAMAP), with more than 1,100 clinicians having
registered for the program since its launch in August 2023. However, it will take time for these
learnings to be integrated into the practice of individual practitioners.
In addition, while work is complete on the development of model practice standards and some
provinces have successfully integrated them into their guidance documents, others are still in the
process of reviewing and updating their standards. Some need more time to undertake this work.
More time will also provide the opportunity for work with provinces and territories to implement
other measures recommended by the Expert Panel and the Special Joint Committee, such as more
robust case review and oversight mechanisms. The next three years will provide an opportunity to
fully realize the benefits of these collective efforts and provide additional clarity and assurances to
Canadians and practitioners.
Q.9: Would another one-year extension not be sufficient?
The federal government in collaboration with the provinces and territories have made a great deal of
progress in preparing for the expansion of MAID eligibility for persons whose underlying medical
condition is mental illness.
However, a one-year extension is not likely to be enough time to achieve the level of system
readiness that the provinces and territories and other key stakeholders would need in order to feel
prepared for the expansion of MAID eligibility to include mental illness. We want to avoid having to
extend the exclusion clause again.
Provinces and territories have indicated that they need more time to prepare their clinicians and
health care in order to safely assess MAID requests in cases where mental illness is the sole
underlying medical condition.
A three-year extension should provide PTs and their stakeholders sufficient time to have the
appropriate structures and mechanisms in place to manage and assess MAID requests where
mental illness is the sole underlying medical condition.
From the federal perspective, we will continue to encourage and support PT planning, including
exploring models of case review and oversight through an FPT Working Group and supporting the
development of clinical resources for practitioners. The three-year timeframe also provides an
opportunity to enhance reporting on MAID activity, for additional engagement with impacted
populations (persons with mental illness; Indigenous People) and allows time to undertake and
respond to findings of a Parliamentary review.
Q.10: Is the federal government considering permanently removing eligibility for persons suffering
solely from a mental illness?
No, the Government of Canada is not considering permanently removing eligibility for persons
suffering solely from a mental illness.
The government recognizes that the suffering caused by a mental illness is on par with that of a
physical illness, and has no plans to permanently prohibit or further delay allowing MAID for
persons with a mental illness. However, it is important to ensure that practitioners are prepared to
appropriately evaluate these requests, and health systems are prepared to manage them.
The proposed extension of the temporary exclusion of eligibility for persons suffering solely from a
mental illness would allow more time for the provinces and territories, and their partners, to
prepare their health care systems.
This could include implementing robust regulatory guidance across the country and developing
additional resources for their MAID assessors and providers. In addition, this extension will provide
practitioners with more time to become familiar with the available training and supports, gain
confidence in applying the guidelines and safeguards, and overall, feel supported for the
expansion.
The Government of Canada is committed to a measured, thoughtful and compassionate approach
to ensure Canada’s MAID system meets the needs of people in Canada, protects those who may be
vulnerable, and supports autonomy and freedom of choice of individuals. We will continue to work
with the provinces and territories, medical professionals, people with lived experiences, and other
stakeholders to support the safe implementation of MAID, with appropriate safeguards in place, to
affirm and protect the inherent and equal value of every person’s life.
Q.11: Is excluding eligibility for persons whose sole medical condition is mental illness
discriminatory and unconstitutional?
NOTE: Question should be directed to the Minister of Justice (response updated by Justice)
The government’s position is that this temporary exclusion of eligibility for persons suffering solely
from mental illness is constitutional.
This exclusion is based on the inherent risks and complexity associated with allowing MAID in
circumstances where the sole medical condition is a mental illness, and the need for more time to
explore how to safely provide access to these individuals.
The exclusion is not based on the assumption that individuals who suffer from mental illness lack
decision-making capacity, or on a failure to appreciate the severity of their suffering.
Q.12: Can you respond to criticism that depressed children and teenagers will have greater
capacity to end their own lives under Canada’s new MAID law?
Canada’s law does not permit for MAID to be administered to persons under 18 years of age under
any circumstance.
The bill does not alter the minimum eligibility age (18+) for MAID in Canada.
SPECIAL JOINT PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE ON MAID (AMAD)
Q.13: What does AMAD’s third report recommend?
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) tabled their report, MAID and Mental Disorders: The
Road Ahead, on January 29, 2024. While recognizing that considerable progress has been made in
preparing for the expansion of eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness, AMAD
recommended an additional delay until the Minister of Health and the Minister of Justice are
satisfied, in consultation with provincial and territorial counterparts and Indigenous Peoples, that it
can be safely and adequately provided.
It also recommended that a joint parliamentary committee be re-established to assess
preparedness one year prior to expanding MAID eligibility for mental illness as the sole condition.
The report includes dissenting and supplementary opinions :
Dissenting opinions by some Committee Senators recommending the Government not accept the
report and if seeking a delay to the deadline, it should also submit a reference question to the
Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the constitutionality of such an extension as soon as possible;
and
Supplementary opinions by the Conservative Party members who recommend an indefinite pause
on MAID eligibility for mental illness, and by the Bloc Québecois member who cites concerns with
the phrasing of the Committee’s recommendation and methodology, but considers the health
system is not ready (the Bloc do, however, support the idea of expanding MAID eligibility for mental
illness).
Q.14: Why does the Bill not provide a timeline for the parliamentary committee to complete its
review?
The Bill is clear on when a review has to commence and when the legislation is set to change. With
these dates in mind, the Parliamentary Committee is able to set its timelines for review. Parliament
is well placed to organize its affairs.
Q.15: How do you respond to AMAD’s third report that we are not ready to safely expand MAID to
persons with a mental illness?
We recognize and appreciate the time dedicated by the committee members and the hundreds of
individuals and organizations who submitted thoughtful briefs as part of the committee process.
Important progress has been made to prepare for MAID eligibility for persons whose sole medical
condition is a mental illness. However, in consultations with the provinces, territories, medical
professionals, people with lived experience and other stakeholders, we have heard – and agree –
that the health system is not yet ready for this expansion.
However, we believe that, without a firm timeline, as suggested by AMAD, there is a risk that the
excellent progress and ongoing activities by the provinces and territories, health care regulators and
the practitioners themselves, will lose momentum. It is important to provide predictability and a
clear milestone to which all partners can work towards.
We also see the value, as AMAD has suggested, in having a joint parliamentary committee to
undertake a comprehensive review relating to MAID eligibility for persons with a mental illness. This
measure will further serve to examine progress made by provinces, territories, and partners, in
achieving overall health care system readiness..
Q.16: What is your response to suggestions by some AMAD Senators that the Government should
seek a reference from the Supreme Court on MAID and mental illness?
NOTE: Question should be directed to the Minister of Justice (response updated by Justice Jan31)
We recognize that some members of the Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) recommend the
Government submit a reference question to the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the
constitutionality of an extension to MAID eligibility for persons with a mental illness as an
underlying condition.
We cannot speculate about any decisions the government might make.
However, the Minister of Justice has reviewed the Bill and has certified that it is not inconsistent
with the Charter in accordance with his obligation to do so under section 4.1 of the Department of
Justice Act. The Minister of Justice will be tabling a Charter Statement outlining the Charter
considerations of the Bill soon.
MAID MONITORING AND REPORTING
Q.17: How many Track 2 MAID provisions occur each year?
Note: “Complex cases” is sometimes used as a proxy for Track Two or non-RFND cases. It is
simpler to understand, but not entirely accurate. Some cases in the Track 1 (RFND) stream may
also be considered “complex” (e.g. a life-limiting illness combined with mental illness or
exacerbated by the presence of structural vulnerabilities).
Health Canada recently released (October 2023) the Fourth Federal Annual Report on MAID
representing MAID data collected for 2022.
In 2022, 463 MAID provisions involved persons whose natural deaths were not reasonably
foreseeable (non-RFND). This represents only 3.5% of the total number of MAID provisions (13,241)
in 2022 and less than 0.2% of all deaths in Canada. The previous year (2021), non-RFND provisions
represented 2.2% (n=223) of all MAID provisions.
The most cited underlying medical condition for the non-RFND population receiving MAID was a
neurological condition such as Parkinson’s disease or ALS (50%) which is similar to 2021 results.
The average age of these individuals was approximately 73 years.
In 2024, when enhanced data is available, the Annual Report will provide information about the
condition(s) causing the person’s suffering (and duration); if the person had a disability (and
type/duration), the length of the assessment period (where a longer period could indicate a more
complex case), and information about the types of services/supports available to alleviate their
suffering that were discussed and offered to the person.
Q.18: How many MAID provisions where mental illness is the sole underlying medical condition do
we expect?
Since mental illness is not yet eligible in Canada, our best source of information is international
experience where mental illness is an eligible medical condition, recognizing that differences exist
in the assisted dying regimes and health care systems.
It is expected that there will likely be very few eligible cases for MAID where mental illness is a sole
underlying condition.
In the Netherlands, the 2022 Dutch Regional Euthanasia Review Committee Report (annual report
based on MAID in that country) indicated that out of a total of 8,720 cases of euthanasia in 2022,
115 patients were suffering from one or more psychiatric disorders representing 1.3% of all cases in
the Netherlands that year. This relative percentage has remained consistent for several years.
PROCEDURAL SAFEGUARDS
Q.19: Are there enough safeguards in the law to protect people who might be more vulnerable due
to their social circumstances?
Note: This response is not directly relevant to the lifting of the extension, but questions may be
raised during debate.
The legislation currently includes rigorous eligibility criteria where a person must have a grievous
and irremediable (i.e. incurable) medical condition that puts them in an advanced state of
irreversible decline in capability that causes them enduring physical or psychological suffering that
can not be relieved under conditions they consider acceptable.
The March 2021 amendments allowing for expanded access to MAID added new and enhanced
mandatory safeguards to help practitioners identify and potentially address the sources of suffering
and vulnerability that could lead the person to ask for MAID:
If neither of the two assessors has expertise in the person’s condition, then a third provider with
such expertise must be consulted.
The safeguards include a requirement for the practitioner to inform the patient of the means
available to relieve their suffering, such as counselling, mental health, and disability support
services, and to offer consultations with relevant professionals who provide those services.
The assessor must also agree with the person requesting MAID that the requestor has considered
the available means to relieve their suffering.
The minimum timeframe for consideration of a request from a person who natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable is 90 days. This ensures that a thorough assessment takes place with
careful consideration of the totality of the person’s circumstances.
The legislative safeguards provide a high bar for protecting persons who may be vulnerable. The
Expert Panel noted that their recommendations are not limited to requests where mental illness is
the sole underlying condition, but apply to any case where similar concerns around incurability or
irremediability, assessing decision-making capacity and structural vulnerabilities arise irrespective
of the requester’s diagnosis, i.e., whether the person’s sole condition is a mental disorder or
another complex condition.
However, no two MAID requesters are the same. The legislation provides a framework, but does not
address each individual situation. Implementation of the framework is the responsibility of the
provinces and territories, and assessments are the responsibility of medical professionals.
Ultimately it is the responsibility of the assessing practitioners to review each request on a case-by-
case basis and take into account all a person’s circumstances when determining eligibility.
The various activities that have already been undertaken, such as the practice standards, the
enhanced data requirements under the new monitoring system and the ongoing research plan, will
serve to strengthen our ability to understand and for practitioners to offer options to mitigate the
impact of a person’s social circumstances on their suffering.
However, we recognize the shared responsibility for governments and society to advance measures
to support persons who may be vulnerable due to their social circumstances.
Q.20: What more can we do regarding oversight of MAID to increase the public’s confidence in the
system?
Let me first share what is currently happening with respect to case review and oversight in MAID
assessment and delivery.
In Canada, we have a process of self-regulation within the medical and nursing professions. The
provincial and territorial regulatory bodies have a mandate to protect the public for all health care
and MAID is no exception. They have established mechanisms to investigate complaints about
their professionals and discipline for not adhering to the professional standards. Most health
professional regulatory bodies have MAID standards or policies in place and are updating these
standards to address more complex cases based on the MAID practice standard released by Health
Canada.
In those provinces that represent over 90% of the country’s MAID provisions, formal provincial-level
mechanisms already exist for MAID oversight. For example, in Ontario, the Chief Coroner reviews
every MAID provision, as does Québec’s End-of-Life Commission. Both these bodies have strict
policies regarding the timing and type of information to be reported by clinicians. The QC
Commission issues annual reports that include some information about instances of non-
compliance with its Act. British Columbia and Alberta each have MAID review committees that
review more complex provisions. Health authorities in Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Nova Scotia
each have protocols in place for the coordination, review and debrief of MAID requests.
Clinicians also use a pan-Canadian community of practice established by the Canadian
Association of MAID Assessors and Providers (CAMAP) for advice and guidance on complex cases,
in addition to support through their regulatory colleges and professional insurance bodies.
Health Canada is collaborating with PTs regarding models for case review and oversight to address
more complex cases such as those involving mental illness. There is agreement to work together to
enhance consistency and share information between jurisdictions on best practices. As this is an
area of PT jurisdiction, it will be a medium-term project that will require significant FPT
collaboration and will benefit from additional time prior to permitting MAID eligibility solely for
mental illness.
Q.21: Didn’t the QC Commission recently find more non-compliance with the MAID law?
In August, 2023, the latest annual report of Quebec’s End of Life Commission reported a significant
increase in MAID provisions. The report also noted 15 cases of non-compliance with Quebec’s
MAID law.
However the Collège des Médecins du Québec, the regulator of medical practice in the province,
issued a statement indicating it was unaware of evidence to support the Commission’s concerns. It
also indicated that none of the 15 “non-compliant cases” were referred further to the Collège’s
internal disciplinary tribunal. Health Canada understands this to mean no infractions were found to
have occurred.
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SUPPORTS
Q.22: Are some Canadians receiving MAID for reasons solely related to lack of support services?
Note: this response is not directly relevant to the lifting of the extension, but questions may be
raised during debate
No one can lawfully receive MAID solely on the basis of lack of social supports such as housing and
mental health and addiction services.
Such a MAID request could not be assessed as eligible by two independent practitioners if the
assessors had reason to believe that the person’s grievous and irremediable medical condition and
associated suffering could be relieved on a sustained basis by access to reasonable and available
treatment and social services.
The legal framework, including rigorous eligibility criteria and safeguards, aims to ensure that
access to MAID can be managed without putting at risk either vulnerable people or those whose
suffering might be relieved by appropriate and available clinical interventions or other supports.
Q.23: What is the Government of Canada doing to address mental health support in Canada?
The Government of Canada is taking an integrated, inclusive approach to investments in family
health services and primary care health teams, the health workforce, and data and digital tools to
support provinces and territories in meeting the mental health needs of people across Canada.
Through Budget 2023, the government is investing more than $200 billion to improve health care for
Canadians, including $46.2 billion in funding to provinces and territories (PTs). This includes $25
billion over 10 years in new funding to PTs through tailored bilateral agreements, focused on four
shared priorities: increasing mental health and substance use services and support, improved
family health services, efforts to support the health workforce, and improved data infrastructure,
including the development of transparent and accountable health data indicators, standards, and
tools.
These bilateral agreements with PTs will help further expand the delivery of timely, high-quality and
accessible health services, including mental health services as well as contribute to activities or
actions focusing on reducing substance use-related harms, prevent overdose, reduce stigma, with
a view to saving lives.
The Government of Canada has also taken an important step to provide suicide prevention support.
9-8-8, Canada’s new three-digit suicide crisis helpline, is now available to call or text, in English and
French, 24 hours a day and seven days a week, across Canada.
Moreover, rapid access to “one-stop shops” of integrated and culturally safe youth-targeted
services in the community, including mental health and substance use supports, can make a real
difference. That is why our Government is helping expand Integrated Youth Services (IYS), including
investing $18 million for IYS research, data and infrastructure to support our PT colleagues to build
IYS networks in their regions.
PERSPECTIVES OF THE PSYCHIATRIC COMMUNITY
Q.24: What were the key conclusions of the Expert Panel on Mental Illness
A key conclusion of the Panel was that the challenges people tend to associate with MAID eligibility
for persons with mental disorder (e.g., irremediability, decision-making capacity, suicidality and
structural vulnerability) are neither unique to requests for MAID from persons with a mental
disorder, nor applicable to every requester who has a mental disorder.
The Panel also concluded that new legal safeguards are not required to ensure that requests for
MAID from individuals with a mental disorder are handled safely and appropriately. They noted that
the legal framework for MAID already sets a very high bar for eligibility.The key consideration for the
Panel was ensuring that practitioners have additional guidance on how to operationalize the
existing eligibility criteria and safeguards in the context of mental disorder and other complex MAID
requests.
The central recommendation of the Panel was for federal, provincial and territorial governments to
facilitate collaboration among regulatory bodies on the development of MAID practice standards.
Health Canada supported the development and release of a Model MAID Practice Standard and a
companion Advice to the Health Profession in March 2023.
Most of the remaining recommendations provide guidance on the interpretation of the MAID
eligibility criteria, application of the legislated safeguards, and the assessment process; others
focus on measures to improve the functioning of Canada’s MAID regime more broadly.
Q.25: Several psychiatrists have raised concerns with respect to the irremediability of mental
disorders and the need for consensus on when and if a mental disorder can be deemed
“irremediable”. What do you have to say about this?
While there are some psychiatrists that believe that all forms of mental disorder can be effectively
treated and managed, most psychiatrists acknowledge that some patients can suffer from a mental
illness where multiple treatments, tried over a number of years, have not been effective in relieving
their suffering.
In its final report, the Expert Panel noted that, in the context of mental illness, MAID should only be
available for persons with longstanding conditions leading to functional decline and for which they
have found no relief from suffering, despite an extensive history of attempts with different types of
interventions and supports. The Expert Panel recommends that assessors consider the number
and type of treatment attempts made, the outcomes of those treatments, and the severity and
duration of the illness, disease or disability when determining eligibility.
The Expert Panel also noted that the potential uncertainty that a future treatment might be effective
must be balanced with the patient’s own experience of suffering and right to self-determination.
The Model MAID Practice Standard and Advice to the Profession released through Health Canada
further operationalize this guidance. The CAMAP training curriculum also provides practitioners
with examples of how to determine irremediability in complex cases.
Q.26: Some psychiatrists have called for clarity on what could be a request for suicide compared
with MAID. How can practitioners make this determination when a mental disorder is driving a
person’s request?
We recognize that suicidality is a concern and agree that it is important to distinguish between
suicidal intent and a rational and well-considered request for MAID from someone with a long-
standing mental disorder.
We have heard from practitioners that psychiatrists are well trained to do this. Practitioners have
indicated that suicide assessments are already part of current MAID assessment practices, as are
suicide prevention efforts when these are warranted.
To ensure that a request for MAID for mental illness is well considered, the Expert Panel
recommended that requesters be assessed on a number of occasions over time, including when
possible, during periods of remission or reduced symptoms, and not during periods of acute
emotional distress or crisis. From their perspective, suicidal ideation must be considered and
evaluated to best determine whether the requester’s wish to end their life by MAID represents a
capable appraisal of their situation rather than a potentially treatable symptom of their mental
disorder.
The Model MAID Practice Standard and Advice to the Profession released through Health Canada
further operationalize this guidance.
Q.27: Is there a lack of agreement among health care professionals about the appropriateness of
expansion?
It is not uncommon for there to be professional differences of opinion within medicine. The
question of MAID for persons with a mental illness is no different. There are strongly held beliefs on
both sides of this question.
Despite these divergent views, there is a growing body of evidence that points to the fact that MAID
for persons with a mental illness can be safely administered with the right training and safeguards
in place. The development of the Practice Standards and the CAMAP training modules are key to
ensuring that MAID can be appropriately assessed in complex cases, including mental illness.
In 2021, the temporary exclusion of eligibility for persons suffering solely from mental illness was
based on the inherent risks and complexity associated with allowing MAID in circumstances where
the sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness, and the need for more time to explore
how to safely provide access to these individuals.
It is important to ensure that providers are prepared, so that the health care system can
appropriately manage these MAID requests. This can be done through ongoing collaboration with
health system partners and provinces and territories.
MENTAL ILLNESS
Q.28: What is the difference between mental illness and mental disorder?
The use of the terms “mental illness” and “mental disorder” varies depending on the document in
question.
The MAID legislation uses “mental illness.” In this context, the term “mental illness” is understood
to capture all mental disorders that are primarily treated under the domain of psychiatry, and do not
include neurocognitive or neurodevelopmental disorders, such as dementias, autism spectrum
disorders, or intellectual disabilities. In other words, patients suffering from dementias, for
example, are currently eligible to receive MAID in Canada because dementia is classed as a
neurological or neurocognitive disorder.
On the other hand, experts and practitioners have expressed a preference for the term “mental
disorder”, which is a clinically defined term that includes neurocognitive and neurodevelopmental
disorders.
Q.29: Is it possible to determine a mental illness is resistant to all treatments?
There is no Criminal Code requirement that a mental illness must be treatment resistant. The
eligibility criteria for MAID require that in addition to their enduring and intolerable suffering, a
requestor must be diagnosed with a serious and incurable condition, and be in an advanced state
of irreversible decline in capability.
Findings from the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness and the Model Practice Standard on
MAID developed to inform clinicians on this question, stress the importance of a careful, thorough
approach to assessments that takes into account a range of factors, such as the person’s past
experience with treatments, as well as the severity and duration of the person’s illness, disease or
disability.
The guidance in the MAID Practice Standard provides additional clarity, indicating that that
incurable and irreversible mean there are no reasonable treatments remaining. “Reasonable” is
determined by the practitioner and the person together exploring recognized, available and
potentially effective treatments in light of the person’s circumstances. Practitioners must assess
patients on a case-by-case basis and that the requester and assessors must come to a shared
understanding that the person meets these criteria. This is the approach used in other international
regimes where assisted dying for mental disorder is permitted.
It is not possible to specify an exact number of treatments as that is dependent upon the person’s
medical condition. To understand the range of treatment options, practitioners refer to existing
condition-specific clinical practice guidelines, scientific literature and other professionals with
expertise in treating the condition.
Q.30: How do you respond to criticism that Canada’s MAID legislation is going against suicide
prevention efforts?
Protecting vulnerable persons, including those suffering from mental illness or in crisis, remains a
priority for the Government of Canada. It is important to note that international evidence does not
indicate that there is a direct causal relationship between the availability of MAID and an increase
in suicide rates.
SUBSTANCE USE
Q.31: Recent media reports have stated that the Government will expand MAID ‘for people addicted
to drugs’ in March 2024. Will MAID be an option for persons with drug addictions?
Substance use disorder is a recognized mental disorder in the DSM (Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual (DSM) of Mental Disorders used by health care professionals to diagnose mental disorders,
and therefore could be an eligible medical condition when the mental illness exclusion is lifted.
However, MAID is an option that is available only for eligible people, and the legislation sets a high
bar with stringent eligibility criteria and robust procedural safeguards in order to protect vulnerable
people, including those suffering from mental disorders including substance use. In other words,
just because someone has a substance abuse disorder does not mean they will be eligible for
MAID.
Supports exist to help clinicians navigate MAID requests that involve this disorder. For example,
substance use disorder is specifically addressed through a case scenario in the MAID and Mental
Disorder module of the MAID curriculum and is also referenced in the Model MAID Practice
Standard.
Substance use disorder is often associated with multiple diseases or medical conditions, occurring
simultaneously. MAID assessments for these more complex conditions are expected to take more
time. The Expert Panel is of the view that:
Requests should be assessed on multiple occasions, over time, including during periods of
remission or reduced symptoms, and not during periods of acute emotional distress or crisis.
Practitioners should explore treatment attempts made up to the time of assessment, including their
duration and intensity, outcomes of those treatments, and severity and duration of the disorder.
Assessments should involves obtaining the individual’s health records and personal data, gathering
collateral information, including from the treating team of health professionals, family members
and significant contacts, and consulting with other medical specialists, subspecialists and others
for additional expertise where necessary.
The Expert Panel also advises that where an individual refuses to consent to the involvement of
others or the provision of information necessary for the practitioner to complete a MAID
assessment, the person cannot be found eligible.
The Government has provided significant funding to support mental health and substance use
supports and to develop national standards for substance use services.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Q.32: Will Indigenous communities support the extension of the exclusion?
Testimony before the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD) and in other
public statements suggest that views are mixed amongst Indigenous persons and communities
regarding MAID eligibility for persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness.
Many have concerns with respect to broadened access, noting concerns about access in the
absence of culturally safe health care services, and that eligibility for persons with a mental illness
could undermine suicide prevention efforts in their communities.
The extension will permit more time for Health Canada to engage with Indigenous communities to
inform policies, guidance and training material for clinicians to support enhanced integration of
cultural safety in MAID practices.
Q.33: What is the Government doing to engage with Indigenous Peoples on MAID?
The Government of Canada has launched a two year engagement process on MAID to hear the
perspectives of First Nations, Inuit and Métis, including urban Indigenous people, non-status/off-
reserve Indigenous people, Indigenous peoples living with disabilities, and Two-Spirit, LGBTQQIA+
and gender-diverse Indigenous people.
The engagement takes a two-pillar approach through both Indigenous-led and Health Canada-led
engagement activities. To date, nine Indigenous organizations have been funded to lead community
engagement on MAID and/or palliative care. Health Canada is supporting additional engagement
activities including an online survey open until June 30, 2024, and a suite of 23 national knowledge
exchange roundtables, led by an Indigenous-owned business, scheduled to take place between
February and April 2024 in seven locations across Canada and virtually.
The information collected through all engagement activities will inform a What We Heard report
(WWHR) on the views and experiences of Indigenous Peoples on MAID, planned for release in 2025.
The WWHR will help to guide culturally safe and informed MAID policy at all levels of government
and respect the diversity of Indigenous Peoples.
Health Canada will provide an official update to Parliament on Indigenous engagement on MAID in
March, 2024.
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Q.34: How do you respond to advocates for persons with disabilities who are saying that extending
MAID eligibility beyond an end of life regime violates the equality rights and dignity of persons with
disabilities?
The Government of Canada fully respects the equality rights of Canadians with disabilities and has
taken concrete measures to recognize and uphold them. As an example, Canada has acceded to
the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(UNCRPD), which means that Canadians have additional recourse to make a complaint to the UN
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, if they believe their rights under the
Convention have been violated.
The preamble of MAID legislation passed on March 17, 2021, recognizes the importance of both
equality and autonomy rights, and acknowledges Canada’s obligations as a signatory to the
UNCRPD. The Government of Canada believes the amendments are consistent with its human
rights obligations. The expansion of eligibility for MAID is based on respect for the autonomy of all
persons with a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability to choose MAID as a response to
intolerable suffering that cannot be alleviated by means acceptable to them.
The Government of Canada is committed to a measured, thoughtful and compassionate approach
to ensure Canada’s MAID system meets the needs of people in Canada, protects those who may be
vulnerable, and supports autonomy and freedom of choice of individuals. That is why the Criminal
Code includes enhanced safeguards for persons whose natural death is not reasonably
foreseeable. These safeguards seek to address the diverse sources of suffering and vulnerability
that could potentially lead a person who is not nearing death to ask for MAID.
Moreover, the federal Disability Inclusion Action Plan and the recently passed (June 2023) Canada
Disability Benefit Act are intended to reduce poverty and support financial security of persons with
disabilities.
ADVANCE REQUESTS FOR MAID
Q.35: With the interest in advance requests for MAID such as in Quebec and federally through a
Senator’s Bill, are we planning to permit advance requests for MAID?
There are no plans to amend the Criminal Code to permit advance requests for MAID.
An advance request refers to situations where a person requests MAID before they are eligible (and
before they want) to receive it. A person outlines the circumstances under which they would want
to receive MAID, in the future, if such circumstances arise after they lose decision making capacity
The provision of MAID based on an advance request is not permitted under the Criminal Code
because the provisions require that a person must be experiencing enduring and intolerable
suffering and be able to provide consent immediately before MAID is provided. With an advance
request, a person would make a request for MAID before they are experiencing enduring and
intolerable suffering, and receive MAID after they have lost capacity to consent.
In June 2023, the National Assembly of Quebec passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting
end-of-life care and other legislative provisions. When this provision comes into force, the
amended legislation will allow the provision of MAID based on an advance request in the province.
This aspect of the law is not in force yet, and will come into force on a date to be set by the
government that can be no later than June 7, 2025.
A practitioner who provides MAID in accordance with this aspect of Quebec’s law, when it is in
force, would commit a criminal offence.
The Criminal Code does permit a person to make a waiver of the requirement for final consent in
limited circumstances: where their death is reasonably foreseeable, they have been assessed and
found eligible for MAID (i.e., are experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering and have capacity),
they have scheduled a date to receive MAID, and they risk losing capacity to consent before that
date. This is sometimes referred to as “Audrey’s amendment” and came info effect with former Bill
C-7.
This waiver of final consent situation is not an advance request for MAID.
The government’s response to AMAD’s recommendation supporting advance requests does not
make any commitments to expanding federal legislation, noting that further consultation and study
is required. We will follow, with interest, the discussions that take place on Senator Wallin’s Bill S-
248 which proposes to permit advance requests for MAID. This Bill has been referred to a Senate
Committee for review.
Bill C-XX
An Act to amend An act to Amend the Criminal Code
(medical assistance in dying), No. 2
Purpose
To extend the exclusion of eligibility for receiving medical assistance in dying (MAID) in
circumstances where the sole underlying medical condition identified in support of the request for
MAID is a mental illness (MI-SUMC) for a period of 3 years, until March 17, 2027.
To ensure the safe provision of MAID in these circumstances by allowing more time for the uptake of
key resources by the medical and nursing communities and to provide provinces and territories
with additional time to ensure healthcare system preparedness.
Background
On March 17, 2021, former Bill C-7 expanded eligibility for MAID to persons whose natural death is
not reasonably foreseeable. It also temporarily excluded eligibility to receive MAID in
circumstances where a person’s sole underlying medical condition for MAID is a mental illness.
In March 2023, former Bill C-39 extended the temporary exclusion for eligibility for one year, until
March 17, 2024, to provide more time for materials to support the safe delivery of MAID in these
circumstances to be finalized and disseminated.
In the absence of legislative change, this exclusion will be automatically repealed on March 17,
2024, at which point MAID in these circumstances would become lawful, if the existing eligibility
criteria and safeguards are met.
Federal Action
The Federal Government has made important investments to support the safe assessment for
MAID in complex cases, including mental illness, and increase understanding of MAID practice:
Supporting the development of a model MAID Practice Standard and a companion document
Advice to the Profession designed for use by regulatory bodies and clinicians in addressing complex
requests for MAID, including where mental illness is involved (published March 2023);
Working closely with the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and Providers (CAMAP) on the
development of a nationally accredited bilingual MAID curriculum (launched in August 2023);
Strengthening and enhancing existing data collection on MAID by amending the Regulations for the
Monitoring of MAID (enacted January 1, 2023, with new data to be reported in 2024); and,
Engaging with Indigenous Peoples to better understand their perspectives on MAID (including
through Indigenous-led activities, and online engagement).
Current Context
Significant progress has been made in supporting practitioners and the health system to support
the assessment of complex cases, including those with mental illness as a factor.
However, the government has heard that provinces, territories and health care delivery systems
want further delay in the expansion of the law, to allow time for federal-provincial-territorial
collaboration to ensure a consistent and safe approach, with appropriate safeguards, across the
country.
On January 29, 2024, the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD) tabled its
report examining the degree of preparedness for the safe application of MAID for persons whose
sole underlying condition is a mental illness.
While recognizing that important progress had been made, AMAD concluded that the medical
system in Canada is not prepared to deliver MAID where a mental disorder is the sole underlying
medical condition. It recommended:
an additional delay until the Minister of Health and the Minister of Justice are satisfied, in
consultation with provincial and territorial counterparts and Indigenous Peoples, that it can be
safely and adequately provided.
re-establishing AMAD again before the law changes in order to verify the degree of preparedness
attained.
Overview of Bill C-XX
The Bill would extend the temporary MAID mental illness exclusion for three years (until March 17,
2027).
It would do this by amending section 6 of former Bill C-7, which currently sets the coming into force
date of the repeal of the mental illness exclusion to March 17, 2024.
A three-year extension will provide necessary time for:
provinces and territories and their partners to further prepare their health care systems and ensure
supports are in place;
professional regulatory bodies to consider updates to guidance materials, as needed; and
practitioners to undertake training and become familiar with available supports, and gain
confidence in applying the guidelines and safeguards.
The Bill also proposes that within two years after royal assent, a Joint Committee of Parliament
undertake a review relating to eligibility of persons whose sole condition is a mental illness. If it
prepares a report, it must table it with each house of Parliament.
Annex: Relevant Materials
Final Report of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness
Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying
Regulations for the Monitoring of Medical Assistance in Dying
Reports of the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD):
Report 1
Report 2
Report 3
Government Responses to the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying:
Report 1
Report 2
EXPANSION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID) – MENTAL ILLNESS
ISSUE
On February 1, 2024, the Government tabled legislation to extend the temporary exclusion of MAID
eligibility for persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness by three years, to
March 17, 2027. The Bill includes a requirement to initiate a parliamentary review to study the issue
within two years of Royal Assent.
KEY FACTS
Former Bill C-7, which received Royal Assent on March 17, 2021, included a sunset clause
excluding persons with a mental illness as a sole underlying medical condition from seeking MAID
until March 17, 2023. The date was deferred by one-year to March 17, 2024 with the passage of
former Bill C-39.
On January 29, 2024, the Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) tabled its report examining the
degree of preparedness attained to safely assess MAID eligibility for persons whose sole underlying
condition is a mental illness. The Committee concluded that health care systems are not ready and
that further time is needed.
In preparing for the repeal of the exclusion clause in March 2024, the Government of Canada, in
collaboration with provinces and territories, has supported a range of initiatives towards
preparedness, guided by recommendations from an expert panel, that include:
Development of a model MAID Practice Standard designed for use by regulatory bodies and
clinicians
Development and launch of a nationally accredited MAID Training Curriculum for clinicians as well
as funding workshops for clinicians, including psychiatrists.
Regulatory amendments to the federal MAID Monitoring System to enhance data collection and
enrich research, analysis and reporting back to Canadians.
Engagement has begun with Indigenous Peoples to hear their diverse perspectives on MAID to
inform policy, through an online tool and a series of roundtables, in addition to Indigenous-led
activities.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government recognizes that MAID is a deeply personal choice and remains committed to
supporting eligible individuals in having their MAID request considered in a fair, safe and consistent
manner, while supporting efforts to protect those who may be vulnerable.
A great deal of progress has been made to prepare for the March 2024 timeline, however key
stakeholders, including the provinces and territories, are at various levels of readiness and have
asked for more time.
In addition, the Special Joint Committee has concluded that more time is needed as the health care
system is not yet prepared to safely assess MAID eligibility for requests based on mental illness as
the sole underlying condition.
We are seeking a three year extension to the temporary exclusion of MAID eligibility based on
mental illness alone. This time will allow the necessary preparations within our health care
systems, including training more clinicians.
IF PRESSED ON WHY A THREE YEAR DELAY AND NOT AN INDEFINITE PAUSE?
The Government of Canada recognizes that mental illness can cause suffering on par with that of
physical illnesses.
The question is about “when” and not “if”. It is important to establish a firm timeline, otherwise
there is a risk of losing momentum based on the excellent progress and study completed to date.
A three-year extension will provide provinces and territories and partners sufficient time to have
structures and mechanisms in place to safely assess MAID requests where mental illness is the
sole underlying condition.
The extension would also provide practitioners with time to become trained and gain confidence in
applying the guidelines and safeguards.
IF PRESSED ON THE WORK UNDERTAKEN TO SUPPORT PREPAREDNESS
Our Government has been collaborating with provinces and territories, medical and mental health
communities to support system preparedness for the repeal of the mental illness exclusion.
In the past year, we supported important initiatives including development of a model Practice
Standard and Advice to the Profession, and the launch of an accredited bilingual curriculum for
MAID clinicians. We also funded two Knowledge Exchange Workshops for MAID assessors and
providers and launched ongoing engagement with Indigenous Peoples to understand their diverse
views and perspectives on MAID.
IF PRESSED ON THE QUESTION OF MAID FOR PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS AS THE SOLE
UNDERLYING CONDITION
The Government recognizes that mental disorders can cause suffering on par with that of physical
illnesses.
The Government also recognizes that there are diverse views on MAID and mental illness within the
psychiatric community.
Resources such as the Model MAID Practice Standard, Advice to the Profession, and the MAID
training curriculum, and additional resources developed by provinces and territories will support
the medical and psychiatric communities in being prepared for changes to the law.
IF PRESSED ON THE MAID FOR MENTAL ILLNESS AND SUBSTANCE USE
MAID is an option that is available only for eligible Canadians, and the legislation sets a high bar
with stringent eligibility criteria and robust procedural safeguards. The MAID provisions in the
Criminal Code are carefully designed to protect vulnerable people, including those suffering from
mental disorders including substance use disorder.
The Government has provided significant funding to support mental health and substance use
supports and to develop national standards for substance use services.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE WILL SEEK MAID AS A FORM OF SUICIDE, ESPECIALLY
THOSE WITH A MENTAL ILLNESS
The legislation sets a high bar for access. Only individuals with severe, long-standing and
treatment-resistant mental illnesses will be considered for MAID.
The Model MAID Practice Standard indicates that assessors and providers should ensure that a
person’s request is consistent, unambiguous and rationally considered during a prolonged period
of stability, and not during a time of crisis or suicidal ideation.
The Government has provided significant funding to support the launch and implementation of 9-8-
8, a three-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S REACTION TO MEDIA STORIES ALLEGING THAT PEOPLE ARE
SEEKING MAID DUE TO LACK OF NEEDED SERVICES
The legislation sets a high bar with stringent eligibility criteria including having a grievous and
irremediable medical condition. No one can receive MAID solely on the basis of a lack of social
supports, such as housing and mental health services.
Improving access to social and health services remains a priority and governments are working to
address disparities.
On June 22, 2023, the Government passed the Canada Disability Benefit Act to reduce poverty and
support financial security of persons with disabilities.
BACKGROUND
MAID LEGISLATION AND MENTAL ILLNESS
In the original 2016 legislation (former Bill C-14), which legalized MAID for persons whose natural
death was reasonably foreseeable, the Act required the Ministers of Health and Justice to initiate
independent reviews on three particularly complex issues, including requests where the sole
underlying medical condition was mental illness.
In 2016, the Government asked the Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) to conduct these
independent studies. Following a comprehensive study of this matter, experts in this field could not
come to a consensus on this very complicated issue.
Four years later, the Government introduced former Bill C-7, which proposed to expand MAID
eligibility to persons whose death was not reasonably foreseeable. As introduced, former Bill C-7
contained a provision stating that mental illness was not considered to be a disease, illness or
disability. In other words, requests for MAID based solely on mental illness would not be permitted.
As such, no provision for a temporary exclusion was included in the former Bill.
During its study of former Bill C-7, the Senate concluded that MAID requests based solely on
mental illness should be permitted, and amended the former Bill to include a temporary, 18 month
exclusion of eligibility.
In March 2023, Bill C-39 extended by - one year - the temporary exclusion of MAID eligibility for
persons suffering solely from a mental illness.
MAID AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER
To be eligible for MAID, a person must: have a serious and incurable illness, disease, or disability;
be in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability; and, experience enduring and
intolerable suffering. All three of these criteria must be met for a person to be deemed eligible.
Furthermore, the legislation includes enhanced safeguards, which make it a responsibility of the
medical practitioner to ensure that an individual seeking MAID is made aware of the supports
available to them. The person seeking MAID and the practitioners must have discussed reasonable
and available means to relieve the person’s suffering, and agree that the person has seriously
considered those means. These safeguards for persons not nearing a natural death aim to help
practitioners identify and potentially address the sources of suffering and vulnerability that could
lead the person to ask for MAID.
Clinician resources, such as a MAID practice standard and a training curriculum, have been
developed to assist clinicians in their assessments of complex MAID requests, such as those that
involve a mental disorder. These resources point to the need to assess the person over a period of
time and not during a time of crisis to ascertain the durability of the condition and proper capacity
to consent. The MAID curriculum includes a module on MAID and mental illness which includes
information on substance use disorder.
No one can receive MAID solely on the basis of lack of social supports such as housing and mental
health services. All jurisdictions in Canada have a broad range of policies, programs and initiatives
aimed at providing health and social service supports to individuals.
Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing $45 million to develop national standards for
mental health and substance use services, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health
organizations, and key stakeholders. National standards will help to ensure that Canadians receive
high quality, (e.g., safe, effective, patient-centred, equitable, and culturally sensitive) evidence-
based mental health and substance use services. The Government of Canada is also currently
investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental health and substance
use services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and
addiction services.
THE EXPERT PANEL ON MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
As a requirement of former Bill C-7, an Expert Panel was appointed by Ministers of Justice and
Health to conduct an independent review to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply
to MAID requests by persons who have a mental illness. The final report of the Expert Panel on MAID
and Mental Illness was tabled in Parliament on May 13, 2022. It included 19 recommendations that
provide guidance on the interpretation of the MAID eligibility criteria, application of the legislated
safeguards, and the assessment process, as well as advice on measures to improve the functioning
of Canada’s MAID regime more broadly.
The Expert Panel found that the challenges people tend to associate with MAID eligibility for
persons with mental disorder (e.g., irremediability, decision-making capacity, suicidality and
structural vulnerability) are neither unique to requests for MAID from persons with a mental
disorder, nor applicable to every requester who has a mental disorder.
A key conclusion of the Panel was that new legal safeguards are not required to ensure that
requests for MAID from individuals with a mental disorder are handled safely and appropriately.
They noted that the legal framework for MAID already sets a very high bar for eligibility – that existing
MAID eligibility criteria and safeguards, when interpreted appropriately and buttressed by existing
laws, standards, and practices in related areas of healthcare, can provide an adequate structure for
assessing those more complex (track two) MAID requests, including where a mental disorder is the
sole underlying medical condition. The key consideration for the Panel was ensuring that
practitioners have additional guidance on how to operationalize the existing eligibility criteria and
safeguards in the context of mental disorder and other complex MAID requests.
The central recommendation of the Panel was for federal, provincial and territorial governments to
facilitate collaboration among regulatory bodies on the development of MAID practice standards.
This process was completed in March 2023.
In addition to the collaborative work towards the development of MAID practice standards,
provinces and territories, in collaboration with healthcare regulators and MAID communities, have
also been working towards preparedness – some creating specific teams, adding resources,
updating their practice standards and encouraging training to help clinicians in addressing requests
for those more complex MAID cases, and where mental illness is a sole underlying medical
condition.
On July 26, 2022, the Ministers of Health, Justice and Disability Inclusion issued a news release on
the Government’s progress in implementing several of the Panel’s key recommendations to help
prepare the MAID practice community in assessing these complex MAID requests. This progress
included: developing a practice standard for MAID; developing a nationally fully accredited MAID
curriculum; enhancements to the data collection system under the Regulations for the Monitoring
of MAID; plans for Indigenous engagement; and, federally-funded qualitative research on MAID.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The 2021 legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following
its Royal Assent. It stipulated that the Parliamentary Review must address (but not necessarily be
limited to) the topics of mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care
in Canada, and the protection of Canadians with disabilities.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) held three meetings before dissolution. The
committee reconvened in April 2022 and, on June 23, 2022, submitted an interim report,
specifically focused on MAID where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition. The
interim report made no formal recommendations but urged the federal government to support the
timely implementation of the recommendations of the Expert Panel.
AMAD’s second report, containing 23 recommendations on all topics under its remit, was tabled on
February 15, 2023. On June 15, 2023, the Government tabled its Response to AMAD’s report and
recommendations in the House of Commons.
AMAD reconvened in October 2023 to follow up on Recommendation 13 of its second report which
was to examine the degree of preparedness attained for the safe application of MAID for persons
whose sole underlying condition is a mental illness. AMAD tabled its recommendation to
Parliament on January 29, 2024. It concluded that health care systems are not ready and that
further time is needed, and recommended an additional delay until the Minister of Health and the
Minister of Justice are satisfied, in consultation with provincial and territorial counterparts and
Indigenous Peoples, that it can be safely and adequately provided. It also recommended that a joint
parliamentary committee be re-established to assess preparedness one year prior to expanding
MAID eligibility for mental illness as the sole condition. The report included two dissenting opinions
(by Committee Senators) and two supplementary opinions (Conservative Party and the Bloc
Québecois).
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING
Charter Challenge / Défis liés à la Charte
KEY FACTS
During its study of the degree of preparedness for the safe application of MAID for persons whose
sole underlying condition is a mental illness, the Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) heard
differing opinions from legal experts surrounding the constitutionality of the exclusion of eligibility
for persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness.
On January 29, 2024, AMAD tabled its report. The majority opinion of the committee recommended
an additional delay to ensure that the health care system could safely provide MAID in these types
of complex cases. However, dissenting opinions by Senator Dalphond and Senators Kutcher, Megie
and Wallin, with support from Senator Osler and Ravalia questioned whether an exclusion on the
basis of a mental illness alone was in compliance with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the
Charter).
In the Carter decision, the Supreme Court of Canada indicated that Parliament’s choices on how to
balance the competing interests would be given a high degree of deference. The difficult question of
whether to permit MAID for mental illness is one that can be answered in different ways, in
conformity with the Charter.
KEY MESSAGES
The Minister of Justice is best positioned to speak to the legal arguments surrounding the
constitutionality of the exclusion of eligibility.
If pressed on whether the exclusion is in compliance with the Charter…
However, it is the government’s position is that the exclusion of eligibility for persons suffering
solely from mental illness is constitutional.
The government believes that the options of permitting or prohibiting MAID for mental illness are
both permissible options under the Charter.
The question of whether to permit MAID in these circumstances is one that involves competing
constitutionally protected rights and interests.
Courts have recognized that Parliament has leeway, under the Charter, in deciding how to balance
the competing interests in these types of cases.
Our government has committed to the expansion of eligibility, not because we believe the Charter
leaves us no choice, but because we believe it is the right thing to do, when it can be done safely.
We believe that more time is needed to explore how to safely provide access to these individuals.
If pressed on a Supreme Court Reference to determine constitutionality
The Minister of Justice is best positioned to speak to the constitutionality of the exclusion of
eligibility.
The Supreme Court Act allows the Governor in Council (in practice, Cabinet) to refer certain
questions for a hearing and consideration to the Supreme Court of Canada. This can include, for
example, questions concerning the constitutionality of legislation.
The Minister of Justice has reviewed Bill C-62 and he is confident that it is consistent with the
Charter.
For this reason, our government has no plans to initiate a reference at this time.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING
MAID Reporting (Fourth Annual Report)
KEY FACTS
Health Canada has released four annual reports on MAID for the years (2019 – 2022). Health
Canada recently released (October 2023) the Fourth Annual Report on MAID representing MAID
data collected for 2022.
In 2022, there were 13,241 MAID provisions reported in Canada, accounting for 4.1% of all deaths
in Canada.
The number of cases of MAID in 2022 represents a growth rate of 31.2% over 2021, a consistent
trend over the past four years.
Since the introduction of federal MAID legislation in 2016, the total number of medically assisted
deaths reported in Canada is 44,958.
The average age of MAID recipients is 77 years. Slightly more males (51%) than females (49%)
received MAID.
In 2022, 463 MAID provisions involved persons whose natural deaths were not reasonably
foreseeable (non-RFND). This represents 3.5% of the total number of MAID provisions (13,241) in
2022 and less than 0.2% of all deaths in Canada. The previous year (2021), non-RFND provisions
represented 2.2% (n=223) of all MAID provisions.
Among all MAID provisions, cancer is the most cited underlying medical condition.
Among the non-RFND population receiving MAID, the most cited underlying medical condition was
a neurological condition such as Parkinson’s disease or ALS (50%) which is similar to 2021. The
average age of these individuals was approximately 73 years.
The majority of MAID recipients (78%) had received palliative care. The majority (89.5%) of MAID
recipients requiring disability support services, received these services.
There were 16,104 requests for MAID in 2022, an increase of 26% over 2021. Approximately 81% of
requests in 2022 resulted in the administration of MAID. The remaining requests were found
ineligible, withdrawn or the individual died from another cause.
KEY MESSAGES
Data collected under Canada’s monitoring and reporting system for MAID over the past four years,
provides a comprehensive picture of the administration of MAID in Canada and has helped to
inform Canada’s evolving MAID system.
There has been a steady increase in the number of MAID deaths in Canada, however, they represent
a small percentage of all deaths, at 4.1%. Increasing awareness and acceptance of MAID as an
end-of-life care option by Canadians, and growing numbers of MAID providers, are contributing to
the growth in MAID requests.
If pressed on further details regarding Track 1 v Track 2 MAID deaths
The total number of MAID deaths overwhelmingly involves persons whose deaths were imminent
(Track 1), with cancer as the underlying condition. We know from the latest annual report that, in
2022, persons whose natural deaths were not reasonably foreseeable (also referred to as Track 2)
made up only a very small proportion of MAID recipients. The most cited condition in these cases
was a neurological condition such as Parkinson’s disease or ALS.
If pressed on how data collection and reporting will be strengthened
Data collection on MAID has been enhanced by amending the Regulations for the Monitoring of
MAID that require data to be collected with respect to disability, race, and Indigenous identity. New
data collection began on January 1, 2023.
When the enhanced data will be reported later in 2024, the annual report will provide information
about the condition(s) causing the person’s suffering (and duration); if the person had a disability
(and type/duration), the length of the assessment period (where a longer period could indicate a
more complex case), and information about the types of services/supports available to alleviate
their suffering that were discussed and offered to the person.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING
MAID Curriculum
KEY FACTS
The Government funded the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and Providers (CAMAP) to
develop and deliver a nationally accredited, bilingual Canadian MAID Curriculum.
This modular course aims to educate new MAID practitioners, advance the skills of existing MAID
practitioners, and help standardize the approach and delivery of MAID care across Canada.
The Curriculum includes seven modules (a combination of online self-learning modules and
facilitated case-based discussion sessions).
Module 1 – Foundations of MAID in Canada
Module 2 - Clinical Conversations that Include MAID
Module 3 – How to do a MAID Assessment
Module 4 - Assessing Capacity and Vulnerability
Module 5 – Providing MAID
Module 6 - Navigating Complex Cases with Confidence
Module 7 - MAID & Mental Disorders
All the modules are available in both English and French.
The MAID Curriculum offers multiple facilitated sessions each month across Canada. In particular,
Modules 3 to 7 necessitate participation in either in-person or virtual facilitated sessions to
successfully complete the Topic and earn professional development credits. These sessions
revolve around case-based learning and are led by accredited instructor
As of the end of January 2024, over 1100 clinicians have registered for the curriculum including
physicians and nurse practitioners and over 130 psychiatrists across Canada.
Almost 800 clinicians and others have completed at least one of the seven modules, including over
100 clinicians completing modules on MAID assessment and provision and almost 40 completing
the module on MAID and mental disorder. Feedback has been positive.
Since the curriculum was launched in August 2023, 26 facilitated sessions have been delivered in
six jurisdictions (AB, BC, NS, ON, QC, and SK) and fifteen sessions still planned in other
jurisdictions (MB, NL, ON, and QC).
CAMAP hosted a Knowledge Exchange Workshop (through Health Canada funding) that included
over 40 MAID practitioners and psychiatrists from across Canada to discuss roles and
contributions to the proper assessment and management of MAID where mental disorders are
involved, and support local training related to MAID for mental disorders (June 2023).
Through this workshop, and subsequent workshops, CAMAP is developing system coordination
guides, patient journey maps and clinical assessment tools for complex cases including where
mental illness is involved.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government has funded the development of a nationally accredited, bilingual Canadian MAID
Curriculum has been developed by the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and Providers
(CAMAP), to support clinicians in assessing persons who request MAID.
The Curriculum will help achieve a safe and consistent approach to care across Canada and
ensure access to high-quality MAID training
The additional three years proposed in Bill C-62, will allow more time for clinicians to participate in
the Curriculum and apply the guidance provided by the training, especially related to assessing
complex Track 2 requests (for persons whose natural deaths are not reasonably foreseeable).
If pressed on uptake of the MAID Curriculum
Since this training program was launched in August 2023, there has been uptake by over 1100
clinicians - including physicians, nurse practitioners and psychiatrists who have registered for the
program.
If pressed on the curriculum and MAID for persons with mental disorders
Supports exist to help clinicians navigate MAID requests that involve mental disorder. The
curriculum has a module specific to assessing persons with mental disorders. This module
includes an online and in-person facilitated component where clinicians have the opportunity to
apply learned principles through several practical case scenarios.
For example, substance use disorder is specifically addressed through a case scenario in the MAID
and Mental Disorder module of the curriculum. Substance use disorder is also referenced in the
Model MAID Practice Standard.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN
Indigenous Engagement
KEY FACTS
Testimony before the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD) and other
public statements from Indigenous partners suggest that views are mixed amongst Indigenous
persons and communities regarding MAID eligibility for persons whose sole underlying medical
condition is a mental illness.
Many have concerns with respect to broadened access, noting concerns about access in the
absence of culturally safe health care services, and that eligibility for persons with a mental illness
could undermine suicide prevention efforts in their communities.
In 2022, the Minister of Health approved a 2-year plan to engage with Indigenous Peoples to
understand their unique views on and experiences with MAID. The department began
implementation of the engagement in early 2023 with a plan to develop a What We Heard Report in
2025.
To date, over $1.5M has been invested, with an additional $500K planned into 2024 for Indigenous
organizations to lead engagement within their communities. This work will be bolstered by Health
Canada-supported activities such as an on-line engagement tool, and a series of national
knowledge exchange roundtables.
KEY MESSAGES
The extension will permit more time for Health Canada to engage with Indigenous communities to
inform policies, guidance and training material for clinicians to support enhanced integration of
cultural safety in MAID practices.
The Government of Canada has launched a two year engagement process on MAID to hear the
perspectives of First Nations, Inuit and Métis, including urban Indigenous people, Indigenous
people living off-reserve (with or without status), Indigenous peoples living with disabilities, and
Two-Spirit, LGBTQQIA+ and gender-diverse Indigenous people.
The engagement takes a two-pillar approach through both Indigenous-led and Health Canada-led
engagement activities.
Health Canada will provide an official update to Parliament on Indigenous engagement on MAID in
March 2024.
If pressed on engagement details
To date, seven Indigenous organizations have been funded to lead community engagement on MAID
and/or palliative care.
Health Canada is supporting additional engagement activities including an online survey open until
June 30, 2024, and a suite of 23 national knowledge exchange roundtables, led by an Indigenous-
owned firm, scheduled to take place between February and April 2024 in seven locations across
Canada and virtually.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING
PT Readiness
KEY FACTS
The legal framework for MAID is set out in the federal Criminal Code, however it is the provinces and
territories (PTs) who have responsibility for health care delivery, including MAID implementation.
Both Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness (the Panel) and the Joint Parliamentary Committee on
MAID (AMAD) emphasized the importance of:
1. clear practice standards and consistent implementation of guidelines across the country;
2. training for physicians and nurse practitioners;
3. case review and oversight to support best practice and trust in the appropriate application of the
law.
Provincial and territorial governments and their stakeholders, such as health professional
organizations, regulatory bodies, and practitioners, have been actively planning for eligibility for
MAID for persons whose sole medical condition is a mental illness. PTs are at varying states of work
in implementing these key elements, and consequently, their readiness for the lifting of the
exclusion.*
For example, while some PT regulatory bodies have successfully implemented practice standards
developed by an independent task group made up of clinical, regulatory and legal experts into their
guidance documents for clinicians (i.e., AB, NS, NL, ON), others are still in the process of reviewing
and updating their existing standards (i.e., BC, MB, SK, NB, NWT). Others have indicated that they
have not made any advancements on this front.
To support the safe implementation of the MAID framework, Health Canada supported the
development of a nationally accredited bilingual MAID curriculum to support a standardised
approach to care across the country (launched in August 2023). So far, just over 1,100 clinicians
have already registered for the training.
Although initial take-up of this training has been good, it has been variable across the country, with
a some jurisdictions reporting relatively low numbers relative to their provider population, and
others reporting very strong take up among their clinicians. For example, QC is a province with a
very high number of MAID cases, but only 139 practitioners in the province have registered for the
training. In contrast, Manitoba has a comparatively low number of MAID cases, but 26 providers
have registered, which is a high proportion. Provinces need additional time to encourage their
providers to register, and it will take time for these learnings to be internalized and put into
professional practice.
Several provinces have implemented robust oversight mechanisms (i.e., BC, AB, ON, QC). While
these provinces represent the majority (90%) of MAID provisions in Canada, other provinces do not
have formal MAID quality assurance and oversight processes in place to complement existing
complaint-based oversight processes undertaken by professional regulatory bodies (i.e. MB, PEI,
NB). Work is currently underway at the FPT level to explore and share best practices around
possible quality assurance and oversight mechanisms that could be adopted.
In a letter dated January 29, 2024, provincial and territorial Ministers of Health from 10 provinces
and territories (BC, AB, SK, ON, NS, NB, PEI, YK, NT, NU) indicated that they would continue to
support practitioners in meeting their legislative requirements and responsibilities, and enact
appropriate guidance and practices in accordance with the MAID legislative framework. However,
they clearly indicated that more time is needed to put the necessary measures in place to address
capacity concerns that are expected to result from the expansion of MAID eligibility and the need to
assess more complex cases.
Both the Expert Panel as well as AMAD emphasized the importance of interdisciplinary engagement
and the knowledge of available resources and treatments. Experts and practitioner communities
have also expressed the need for support mechanisms to be in place for providers undertaking
assessments and persons who request MAID, irrespective of their eligibility.
While some jurisdictions have robust coordination services to manage requests and provide
ancillary services (i.e., BC, AB, SK, MB, NS, NL), other jurisdictions take a de-centralized approach,
which can result in less coordination across services and disciplines (i.e. ON, PEI, NB). The
availability of necessary support services for both practitioners and patients is also variable,
depending on region.
Quebec has passed legislation excluding eligibility of requests where mental illness is the sole
underlying condition.
KEY MESSAGES
PT variability in preparedness
The government received advice from both the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness and the
Joint Parliamentary Committee on MAID (AMAD) that clear practice standards and consistent
implementation of guidelines across the country; training for physicians and nurse practitioners;
and case review and oversight mechanisms would be essential to ensuring the safe and consistent
application of the law across the country.
Both the Expert Panel as well as AMAD emphasized the importance of interdisciplinary engagement
and the knowledge of available resources and treatments. Experts and practitioner communities
have also expressed the need for support mechanisms to be in place for providers undertaking
assessments and persons who request MAID, irrespective of their eligibility.
Provincial and territorial governments and their stakeholders, such as health professional
organizations, regulatory bodies, and practitioners, have been actively planning for eligibility for
MAID for persons whose sole medical condition is a mental illness.
However, the available evidence suggests that despite collaboration to advance work in
anticipation of the lifting of the exclusion of MAID for persons whose sole underlying condition is a
mental illness, progress has been variable across the country on key elements to support the safe
and appropriate delivery of MAID to this population.
If pressed on practice standards
The federal government has supported the development of Model Practice Standards for MAID that
regulators could adopt and implement, and a bilingual, nationally accredited training program to
support practitioners assessing complex cases, including mental illness.
While some jurisdictions have updated their practice standards in accordance with the Model (i.e.,
AB, NS, NL, ON), others are still in the process of reviewing and updating their existing standards
(i.e., BC, MB, SK, NB, NWT), with some jurisdictions indicating they have not made any
advancements on this front.
If pressed on provider training
In terms of provider training, we know that the take up of MAID curriculum developed for physicians
and nurse practitioners, while good, has significant variability across the country.
Although initial take-up of this training has been good, it has been variable across the country, with
a some jurisdictions reporting relatively low numbers relative to their provider population, and
others reporting very strong take up among their clinicians.
Provinces need additional time to encourage their providers to register, and it will take time for
these learnings to be internalized and put into professional practice.
If pressed on oversight mechanisms
Effective oversight was also identified by the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental illness and the
Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) as a key measure to ensure the appropriate application
of the law and public trust in the system.
Several provinces have implemented robust oversight mechanisms (i.e., BC, AB, ON, QC). While
these provinces represent the majority (90%) of MAID provisions in Canada, other provinces do not
have formal MAID quality assurance and oversight processes in place to complement existing
complaint-based oversight processes undertaken by professional regulatory bodies (i.e. MB, PEI,
NB).
Work is being planned to explore oversight models and best practices through a federal-provincial-
territorial working group, with a view to supporting more consistent and robust quality assurance
and oversight mechanisms across the country.
If pressed on coordination and support mechanisms
Both AMAD and the Expert Panel emphasized the importance of interdisciplinary engagement and
the knowledge of available resources and treatments. Experts and practitioner communities have
also expressed the need for support mechanisms to be in place for providers undertaking
assessments and persons who request MAID, irrespective of their eligibility.
While some jurisdictions have robust coordination services to manage requests and provide
ancillary services (i.e., BC, AB, SK, MB, NS, NL), other jurisdictions take a de-centralized approach,
which can result in less coordination across services and disciplines (i.e. ON, PEI, NB). The
availability of necessary support services for both practitioners and patients is also variable,
depending on region.
If pressed on PT views on the expansion
Provinces and territories are ultimately responsible for the organization and delivery of MAID, and
supporting health services.
A significant majority of provinces and territories were united in their request to delay the lifting of
the exclusion in order to have more time to prepare their clinicians and health care systems to
manage requests were mental illness is the sole underlying condition and put the necessary
supports in place.
They must ensure not only that practitioners are trained to do the work, but that the necessary
supports are available to them and their patients through the assessment process.
If pressed on rationale for the extension
The government is committed to respecting personal autonomy and choice, while supporting and
protecting Canadians with a mental illness who may be vulnerable.
Provinces and territories are ultimately responsible for the organization and delivery of MAID, and
supporting health services. Given their responsibility for how MAID is delivered, moving forward
before provinces and territories are ready would not be the responsible course of action.
The government is committed to continuing to work with the provinces and territories on key areas
where gaps remain, such as practitioner training, consistent guidance across all jurisdictions and
exploring quality assurance and oversight mechanisms to support the safe and consistent delivery
of MAID across the country.
If pressed on whether the government is contemplating an indefinite pause
There are no plans to permanently prohibit or further delay allowing MAID for persons with a mental
illness. This is why the extension is for a specific period of time.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING
Quebec Legislation
KEY FACTS
In June 2023, the National Assembly of Quebec passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting
end-of-life care and other legislative provisions.
A key aspect of the Quebec amendment that differs from the federal MAID legislation is the creation
of a provincial regime to permit advance requests for MAID (to come into force on a date set by the
government that can be no later than June 7, 2025).
On February 7, 2024, the Québec National Assembly passed a motion to “…ask the federal
Parliament to respect the laws adopted by the Parliament of Québec reflecting the will of Québec
society, and that it ask the federal Parliament to amend the Criminal Code in order to respect
Québec’s will to act within its exclusive jurisdiction and thereby allow advance requests for medical
aid in dying, in Québec, based on the criteria established in the Act respecting end-of-life care.”
On February 9, 2024, a spokesperson for Minister Virani indicated to the media that there would not
be Criminal Code amendments to allow an advance request scheme only in Quebec, and was
quoted as saying “The criminal law applies across Canada, ensuring consistent standards
nationwide……guarantees that individuals across the country must adhere to the same rules,
regardless of location, leaving no room for evading consequences in different jurisdictions.”
Mental Illness Exclusion
Quebec’s MAID legislation permanently excludes a mental disorder, other than a neurocognitive
disorder (e.g. Parkinsons), as an eligible condition for MAID in the province.
This is consistent with the existing Criminal Code mental illness exclusion.
From a criminal law perspective, the prohibition of MAID eligibility on the basis of mental disorder in
Quebec’s law would not be problematic even when the Criminal Code mental illness exclusion is
repealed, in 2024 if Bill C-62 does not pass or in 2027 if it does, since the Criminal Code does not
create a right to MAID.
Advance Requests for MAID
An advance request refers to situations where a person requests MAID before they are eligible (and
before they want) to receive it. A person outlines the circumstances under which they would want
to receive MAID, in the future, if such circumstances arise after they lose decision making capacity
The provision of MAID based on an advance request is not permitted under the Criminal Code
because the provisions require that a person must be experiencing enduring and intolerable
suffering and be able to provide consent immediately before MAID is provided. With an advance
request, a person would make a request for MAID before they are experiencing enduring and
intolerable suffering, and receive MAID after they have lost capacity to consent.
AMAD’s second report recommended that the Government of Canada amend the Criminal Code to
allow for advance requests following a diagnosis of a serious and incurable medical condition
disease, or disorder leading to incapacity. The federal government’s response to the second report
does not make commitments to expanding federal legislation, noting that further consultation and
study is required.
On June 2, 2022, Bill S-248, An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying), was
introduced in the Senate by Senator Pamela Wallin. The aim of the Bill is to create a federal advance
request regime for MAID in the Criminal Code for persons who have received a diagnosis that will
lead to incapacity. On June 8, 2023, the Bill passed second reading and was referred to the Standing
Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs (LCJC) for review just prior to summer
adjournment. This review has not yet started.
KEY MESSAGES
On the subject of Quebec permanently excluding mental disorders from MAID eligibility:
In Canada, healthcare and the provision of most health services fall under provisional jurisdiction,
while the criminal law falls under federal jurisdiction. This means that the provision and
administration of MAID services fall under provincial jurisdiction. Provinces and territories may limit
access to MAID in their jurisdictions or add requirements that health care practitioners must
comply with.
Even though Quebec currently does not permit the provision of MAID based on a mental disorder,
over the next three years, Quebec could decide that their system is ready to expand MAID eligibility
for this population and choose to amend their legislation accordingly.
On the subject of advance requests for MAID:
We are aware that there is strong support among the public for advance requests, in particular for
persons who have been diagnosed with a capacity-limiting disease such as Alzheimer’s.
We have also heard that practitioners place a great deal of value on obtaining a “final consent” as a
confirmation of a person’s wishes.
Criminal Code amendments to permit advance requests would be very complex and first require a
great deal of consultation and study with provinces/territories, experts and health care
stakeholders.
A practitioner who provided MAID in compliance with Québec’s advance request scheme, once in
force, would commit a criminal offence. This is because they would not satisfy all of the Criminal
Code requirements and therefore could not avail themselves of the exemptions.
KEY FACTS
Former Bill C-7 required a Parliamentary review to address the topics of mature minors, advance
requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of Canadians
with disabilities. The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) was subsequently created.
In June 2022, AMAD submitted its first (interim) report, specifically focused on MAID where a
mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition (MD-SUMC). The interim report made no
formal recommendations but urged the federal government to support the timely implementation
of the recommendations of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness.
In February 2023, AMAD tabled its second report, containing 23 recommendations on all topics
under its remit, including support for MAID access on the basis of a mental illness alone, provided
that they meet the eligibility requirements. Recognizing the importance of implementing practice
standards, AMAD recommended a committee be reconvened “to verify the degree of preparedness
attained for a safe and adequate application of MAID (in MD-SUMC situations)” (Recommendation
#13).
On January 29, 2024, AMAD tabled its third report, concluded that health care systems are not
ready and that further time is needed, and recommended an additional delay until the Minister of
Health and the Minister of Justice are satisfied, in consultation with provincial and territorial
counterparts and Indigenous Peoples, that it can be safely and adequately provided. It also
recommended that a joint parliamentary committee be re-established to assess preparedness one
year prior to expanding MAID eligibility for mental illness as the sole condition. The report included
two dissenting opinions and 2 supplementary opinions:
Dissenting opinion (Senators Kutcher, Mégie, Wallin; and Senators Osler and Ravalia who
participated in some meetings) recommended that the Government not accept the report on the
basis that AMAD did not fulfill its mandate to focus on the key criteria for preparedness (ie, Expert
Panel review, training program, practice standard and enhanced data), all of which were
completed. It noted that although the report states that the medical system is not ready, AMAD did
not study the medical system as it did not hear from key witnesses such as provincial/territorial
governments and their respective regulators. The dissenting opinion recommended that if the
Government seeks a delay to the deadline, it should also submit a reference question to the
Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the constitutionality of such an extension as soon as possible.
Dissenting opinion by Senator Dalphond noted that AMAD’s recommendation stems largely from a
belief that there is a lack of sufficient medical and social consensus in Canada for access to MAID
on the sole ground of a mental illness, rather than the standalone evidence on preparedness.
Senator Dalphond also recommended the Government submit a reference question to the
Supreme Court of Canada.
Supplementary opinion by the Conservative Party members who recommend an indefinite pause
on MAID eligibility for mental illness
Supplementary opinion by the Bloc Québecois member who cites concerns with the phrasing of
the Committee’s recommendation and methodology, but considers the health system is not ready
(the Bloc do, however, support the idea of expanding MAID eligibility for mental illness).
KEY MESSAGES
We recognize and appreciate the time dedicated by the committee members and the hundreds of
individuals and organizations who submitted thoughtful briefs as part of the committee process.
Important progress has been made to prepare for MAID eligibility for persons whose sole medical
condition is a mental illness. However, in consultations with the provinces, territories, medical
professionals, people with lived experience and other stakeholders, we have heard – and agree –
that the health system is not yet ready for this expansion.
We also see the value, as AMAD has suggested, in having a joint parliamentary committee to
undertake a comprehensive review relating to MAID eligibility for persons with a mental illness. This
measure will further serve to examine progress made by provinces, territories, and partners, in
achieving overall health care system readiness.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING
Data and Structural Vulnerability
KEY FACTS
There have been concerns raised by stakeholders and reports in the media about people requesting
and receiving MAID because of structural vulnerabilities such as poverty or homelessness.
The legal framework for MAID includes rigorous eligibility criteria and safeguards, with the aim of
providing access to MAID without putting at risk either vulnerable people or those whose suffering
might be relieved by appropriate and available clinical interventions or other supports.
The 2022 regulatory amendments to the Regulations for the Monitoring of Medical Assistance in
Dying, which came into force in 2023, will allow the Government of Canada to report on a wider
range of data elements, including those related to structural vulnerability.
KEY MESSAGES
We recognize the shared responsibility for governments and society to advance measures to
support persons who may be vulnerable due to their social circumstances.
The legislative safeguards for MAID provide a high bar for protecting persons who may be
vulnerable.
No one can lawfully receive MAID solely on the basis of lack of social supports such as housing and
mental health and addiction services.
Federal “monitoring” ensures broad and consistent data collection across Canada and supports
the wider societal goals of public accountability and transparency.
If pressed on what range of data are being collected
Ensuring that vulnerable people are not put at risk includes capturing robust data on through the
MAID monitoring system. To this end, we have amended the MAID Monitoring Regulations in late
2022 to expand data collection to areas such as race, Indigenous identity and disability, should the
person consent to providing that information.
Health Canada is currently collecting these data. When the next Annual Report is released, these
additional data could help to provide insight into the question of individual or systemic inequity or
disadvantage in the context of MAID.
FEDERAL ACTIONS TAKEN TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE
SERVICES
ISSUE
In collaboration with provincial and territorial partners, the Government of Canada is working to
increase access to the full continuum of mental health and substance use services to better
support the needs of Canadians.
Key federal actions include increasing investments to provinces and territories to improve access to
mental health and substance use services, as well as targeted initiatives on key priorities, such as
integrated services for children and youth, suicide prevention, and addressing substance use-
related harms, including the overdose crisis and the toxic illegal drug supply, through a range of
actions.
KEY FACTS
Budget 2023 confirmed the Government of Canada’s commitment to improve health care in
Canada through additional investments in health care of close to $200 billion over ten years, of
which $25B will flow to provinces and territories through tailored bilateral agreements. These
bilateral agreements will support progress on four shared priorities to improve access to health
care, with mental health addressed by or included within all four priorities.
This investment builds on previous federal commitments for mental health and substance use,
including an investment of $5 billion over ten years in Budget 2017 to provinces and territories to
improve access to mental health and substance use services.
As part of its commitment to improving access to mental health services, the federal government
has been working with provinces/territories, Indigenous communities, and stakeholders to help
develop and expand Integrated Youth Services, which provide a “one-stop shop” of supports in the
community for youth. In addition, the federal government has been working towards the
establishment of a pan-Canadian “network of networks” that will help us to better understand and
evaluate best practices in IYS across the country.
Through engagement with partners including provinces and territories, the federal government is
leading the development of a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan which builds on the existing
Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention. The Plan will strengthen a collective approach and
identify key areas for action that will have the greatest impact in reducing suicide rates in Canada.
A key pan-Canadian initiative aimed at improved access to effective suicide prevention services is
the 9-8-8 Suicide Crisis Helpline, which went live on November, 30, 2023, providing suicide
prevention support to people in Canada via voice and text, 24/7, in English and French. The Public
Health Agency of Canada is providing $156 million over three years to the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to administer 9-8-8. CAMH has recruited 39 national, provincial, and local
crisis and distress lines to deliver support via 9-8-8.
Mental wellness counselling and crisis intervention for Indigenous Peoples is available through the
Hope for Wellness Helpline and online chat. Both services are available 24 hours a day, seven days
a week in English and French. Telephone support is also available in Cree, Ojibway
(Anishinaabemowin) and Inuktitut.
Further, since 2017, the federal government has invested over $1 billion to support a full continuum
of strategies to address the overdose crisis, including committing $150 million through Budget 2018
for the Emergency Treatment Fund to the provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-
based treatment for substance use, and $359.2 million over five years through Budget 2023 to
support a renewed Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy. The Strategy includes supporting
community-based prevention, treatment, and harm reduction projects through the Substance Use
and Addictions Program and continues to guide the Government's work to save lives and protect
the health of Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
Increasing access to a full continuum of mental health and substance use services through a
compassionate and person-centered approach is central to our health care plan.
The significant federal investments committed in Budget 2023 will help better integrate mental
health and substance use services within health systems, enabling Canadians to access the care
they need.
We are also working with provinces and territories to advance key initiatives, such as the
implementation of integrated youth services hubs, development of a National Suicide Prevention
Action Plan, supporting the 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline and to address the overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON HOW FEDERAL FUNDS ARE USED TO SUPPORT MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE
USE SERVICES
Our government is providing $25B over 10 years through tailored bilateral agreements to provinces
and territories for four shared health priorities, with mental health and substance use supports
addressed by or integrated within them.
Provinces and territories are free to allocate the funding according to their local needs and
circumstances.
The goal is to promote a compassionate and patient- centered approach so that Canadians can
access the full continuum of mental health and substance use supports they need to maintain their
health and wellbeing.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THESE INVESTMENTS WILL ACHIEVE CHANGE
As part of the historic federal investments in health care in 2023, provinces and territories will
collect and report on three headline indicators for mental health and substance use services:
Median wait times for community mental health and substance use services;
Percentage of youth aged 12-25 with access to integrated youth services for mental health and
substance use; and,
Percentage of Canadians with a mental disorder who have unmet health care needs.
These indicators will allow better measurement of progress in increasing access to needed
services.
BACKGROUND
The government will provide $25B over 10 years to support shared health priorities through tailored
bilateral agreements with the view of supporting individual provincial and territorial needs and
circumstances in four priority areas including family health services, health workers and backlogs,
mental health and substance use, and a modernized health system.
As of January 19, 2024, four bilateral agreements have been signed – with British Columbia, Alberta,
Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island. Negotiations with the other provinces and territories are
underway. Examples of some of the mental health and substance use initiatives outlined in
provincial action plans include: integrated youth services and treatment and recovery approaches
to respond to the ongoing overdose crisis (British Columbia); establishing new and improving
existing treatment spaces, along with prioritizing culturally appropriate Indigenous community
supports (Alberta); increasing the number of graduates with specialized training in mental health
and substance use services (Nova Scotia); and continuing to invest in Mobile Mental Health Units
and Student Well-being Teams (Prince Edward Island).
Additionally, the federal government has committed more than $1 billion since 2017 to address the
overdose crisis, including $150 million through Budget 2018 for the Emergency Treatment Fund
(ETF) for provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-base substance use treatment
services. Budget 2023 also committed $359.2 million for a suite of actions under the renewed
Canadian Drug and Substances Strategy which supports a full continuum of culturally appropriate,
equitable supports and services for all Canadians across the spectrum of harm reduction,
treatment and recovery.
As part of Budget 2023, the Government of Canada will invest $144 million in the Substance Use
and Addictions Program (SUAP) to fund community-based supports, and other evidence-based
health interventions. A recent national Call for Proposals (CFP) closed on November 22, 2023 with
the following funding priorities: support and enhance the role of people with lived and living
experience (prevention, treatment, harm reduction), broaden services and programs that target
post treatment aftercare and transition; address alcohol use disorder; and address adult tobacco
cessation. All proposals received under the CFP are in the process of being assessed with funding
announcements to follow in the coming months.
An example of a shared priority for federal, provincial and territorial governments is the
development and expansion of integrated youth services (IYS) models. IYS models of care provide
locally relevant, effective, youth-focused, and integrated services for mental health/substance use
within the community. IYS hubs aim to provide “one-stop shops” of supports in the community,
which can include mental health and substance use services, primary care, sexual health and harm
reduction services, youth and family peer support, social and community services, as well as
support for navigating these systems of care.
There are now approximately 90 IYS hubs across Canada with over 45 more in development. All 13
provinces and territories have developed or are developing an IYS network with a pan-Canadian
Indigenous IYS network in progress. CIHR is leading the IYS Network of Networks initiative allowing
for research and evaluation to inform continuous innovation and learning, as well as responsivity to
emerging challenges. The goal is to improve access to evidence-based, and evidence-generating
best practices with the aim to strengthen and expand IYS networks.
Building on the existing Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention (2016), the federal government is
leading the development of the National Suicide Prevention Action Plan that will pave the way
forward for Canada’s response to suicide by establishing a vision, identifying key areas of action.
The Action Plan, targeting a March 2024 release, will be evergreen, allowing for an iterative
approach that enables further engagement and collaboration with key partners and stakeholders
including provinces and territories and Indigenous organizations. The Government of Canada has a
statutory obligation to report bi-annually under the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention Act.
In addition, the 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline is now available to everyone in Canada via voice and
text, 24/7/365, in both English and French. CAMH is working with 39 national, provincial, and local
crisis and distress lines to administer 9-8-8. It is expected that additional crisis and distress lines
will be integrated into the 9-8-8 responder network over time as the helpline continues to evolve to
meet the needs of people living in Canada.
First Session, Forty-fourth Parliament,
70-71 Elizabeth II – 1-2 Charles III, 2021-2022-2023-2024
HOUSE OF COMMONS OF CANADA
BILL C- 62
An Act to amend An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying), No. 2
FIRST READING, February 1, 2024
Advance Copy To be formatted and reprinted by Parliament
MINISTER OF HEALTH
SUMMARY
This enactment amends An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying) to
provide that persons are not eli- gible, until March 17, 2027, to receive medical assistance in dy- ing
if their sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness.
1st Session, 44th Parliament,
70-71 Elizabeth II – 1-2 Charles III, 2021-2022-2023-2024
HOUSE OF COMMONS OF CANADA
BILL C- 62
An Act to amend An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying), No. 2
His Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada,
en- acts as follows:
2021, c. 2
An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying)
2023, c. 1, s. 1
1 Section 6 of An Act to amend the Criminal
by the following:
March 17, 2027
Subsection 1(2.1) comes into force on March 17,2027.
Review
Parliamentary review
2 (1) A comprehensive review relating to the eligibility of persons whose sole underlying medical
condition is a mental illness to receive medical assistance in dying must be undertaken by a Joint
Committee of both Houses of Parliament designated for that purpose.
Review
(2) The Committee must commence its review within two years after the day on which this Act
receives royal assent.
Report
(3) If following its review the Committee prepares a report — which may include a statement of any
recommended changes to the provisions of the Criminal Code relating to medical assis- tance in
dying — it must table the report before each House of Parliament.
An Act to amend An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying), No. 2
Review
Sections 2-3
Committee expires
(4) The Committee expires on the earlier of the 5 day on which it tables its report before both
Houses of Parliament and March 17, 2027.
Coordinating Amendments
2021, c. 2
3 (1) In this section “other Act” means An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in
dying), chapter 2 of the Statutes of Canada, 2021.
(2)If subsection 1(2.1) of the other Act comes into force before section 1 of this Act, then
(a)section 1 of this Act is deemed never to have come into force and is repealed;
Exclusion
(2.1) For the purposes of paragraph (2)(a), a mental ill- ness is not considered to be an illness,
disease or disability.
(c)subsection 241.2(2.1) of the Criminal Code is repealed on March 17, 2027.
(3)If subsection 1(2.1) of the other Act comes into force on the same day as section 1 of this Act,
then that section 1 is deemed to have come into 25 force before that subsection 1(2.1).
EXPLANATORY NOTES
An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying)
Clause 1: Existing text of section 6:
6 Subsection 1(2.1) comes into force on March 17, 2024.
MAID AND MENTAL DISORDERS: THE ROAD AHEAD
Report of the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying
René Arseneault & Honourable Yonah Martin Joint Chairs
JANUARY 2024
44th PARLIAMENT, 1st SESSION
Published under the authority of the Speaker of the House of Commons
SPEAKER’S PERMISSION
Reproduction of the proceedings of the House of Commons and its Committees, in whole or in part
and in any medium, is hereby permitted provided that the reproduction is accurate and is not
presented as official. This permission does not extend to reproduction, distribution or use for
commercial purpose of financial gain. Reproduction or use outside this permission or without
authorization may be treated as copyright infringement in accordance with the Copyright Act.
Authorization may be obtained on written application to the Office of the Speaker of the House of
Commons.
Reproduction in accordance with this permission does not constitute publication under the
authority of the House of Commons. The absolute privilege that applies to the proceedings of the
House of Commons does not extend to these permitted reproductions. Where a reproduction
includes briefs to a Standing Committee of the House of Commons, authorization for reproduction
may be required from the authors in accordance with the Copyright Act.
Nothing in this permission abrogates or derogates from the privileges, powers, immunities and
rights of the House of Commons and its Committees. For greater certainty, this permission does
not affect the prohibition against impeaching or questioning the proceedings of the House of
Commons in courts or otherwise. The House of Commons retains the right and privilege to find
users in contempt of Parliament if a reproduction or use is not in accordance with this permission.
Also available on the Parliament of Canada Web Site at the following address:
http://www.parl.gc.ca
MAID AND MENTAL DISORDERS: THE ROAD AHEAD
Report of the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying
René Arseneault & Hon. Yonah Martin Joint Chairs
JANUARY 2024
44th PARLIAMENT, 1st SESSION
SPECIAL JOINT COMMITTEE ON MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING
JOINT CHAIRS
René Arseneault Hon. Yonah Martin
VICE-CHAIRS
Shelby Kramp-Neuman Alistair MacGregor
Hon. Marie-Françoise Mégie Luc Thériault
MEMBERS REPRESENTING THE SENATE
Hon. Pierre J. Dalphond Hon. Stan Kutcher
Hon. Pamela Wallin
MEMBERS REPRESENTING THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
Michael Cooper Hon. Ed Fast Darren Fisher Annie Koutrakis James Maloney
Francis Scarpaleggia
OTHER SENATORS AND MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT WHO PARTICIPATED
John Aldag Charlie Angus Élisabeth Brière
Hon. Flordeliz (Gigi) Osler Hon. Mohamed-Iqbal Ravalia
CLERKS OF THE COMMITTEE
Jean-François Lafleur Angus Wilson
LIBRARY OF PARLIAMENT
Research and Education Dana Phillips, Analyst Marlisa Tiedemann, Analyst
THE SPECIAL JOINT COMMITTEE ON MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING has the honour to present its
THIRD REPORT
Pursuant to its orders of reference from the Senate of Tuesday, October 24, 2023 and from the
House of Commons of Wednesday, October 18, 2023, the committee has completed its study of
the degree of preparedness attained for a safe and adequate application of medical assistance in
dying where mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition, in accordance with
Recommendation 13 in the second report of the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in
Dying, and has agreed to report the following:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS
MAID AND MENTAL DISORDERS: THE ROAD AHEAD
Introduction
Background
Evidence of Readiness
Practice Standards
Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying
Provincial and Territorial Standards Relating to Medical Assistance in Dying
Need for Guidelines
Training and Professional Development
Canadian MAiD Curriculum
Other Professional Development Initiatives and Guidance to the Profession
Oversight
Provincial Oversight
The Federal Regulations for the Monitoring of Medical Assistance in Dying
Ongoing Concerns
Assessing Irremediability
Distinguishing MAID Requests from Suicidality
Lack of Professional Consensus
Protecting the Vulnerable
Charter Considerations
Availability of Trained Practitioners
Conclusion
APPENDIX A: LIST OF WITNESSES
REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT RESPONSE
DISSENTING OPINION OF SENATORS KUTCHER, MÉGIE, AND WALLIN
DISSENTING OPINION OF SENATOR DALPHOND
SUPPLEMENTARY OPINION OF THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY OF CANADA
SUPPLEMENTARY OPINION OF THE BLOC QUÉBÉCOIS
LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS
As a result of their deliberations committees may make recommendations which they include in
their reports for the consideration of the House of Commons or the Government.
Recommendations related to this study are listed below.
Recommendation 1
WHEREAS the Committee concludes that the medical system in Canada is not prepared for
medical assistance in dying where mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition
(hereinafter “MAID MD-SUMC”), the committee recommends:
a. That MAID MD-SUMC should not be made available in Canada until the Minister of Health
and the Minister of Justice are satisfied, based on recommendations from their respective
departments and in consultation with their provincial and territorial counterparts and with
Indigenous Peoples, that it can be safely and adequately provided; and
b. That one year prior to the date on which it is anticipated that the law will permit MAID MD-
SUMC, pursuant to subparagraph (a), the House of Commons and the Senate re-establish the
Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance In Dying in order to verify the degree of
preparedness attained for a safe and adequate application of MAID
MD-SUMC. 17
MAID AND MENTAL DISORDERS: THE ROAD AHEAD
INTRODUCTION
Canada has permitted medical assistance in dying (MAID) since 2016, provided that certain legal
criteria and conditions are met. In February 2023, the Special Joint Committee on Medical
Assistance in Dying (the committee) tabled its report, Medical Assistance in Dying in Canada:
Choices for Canadians, which included the following recommendation:1
Recommendation 13
That, five months prior to the coming into force of eligibility for MAID where a mental disorder is the
sole underlying medical condition, a Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying be re-
established by the House of Commons and the Senate in order to verify the degree of preparedness
attained for a safe and adequate application of MAID (in MD-SUMC situations). Following this
assessment, the Special Joint Committee will make its final recommendation to the House of
Commons and the Senate.
In October 2023, the committee was re-established in accordance with this recommendation.
MAID where mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition (MAID MD-SUMC) will be
included in the exemption for MAID in the Criminal Code as of 17 March 2024.
The committee heard testimony from 21 witnesses, including legal and medical experts,
practitioners, representatives of professional associations, mental health organizations, and
regulators, as well as representatives of Health Canada and the Department of Justice. The
committee also received hundreds of written submissions, including briefs and written opinions,
which demonstrates the great interest of Canadians in the difficult issue of MAID. The committee is
grateful to all who shared their views and experiences regarding MAID. Those submissions for which
we have permission to do so from the authors will be made available on the committee’s website,
and will undoubtedly be invaluable to future parliamentary committees studying this topic. The
committee’s sincere appreciation to all who participated cannot be overstated.
This report reflects the narrow scope of the committee’s mandate; it is not a full review of MAID in
Canada. The committee, which based its report and recommendations solely on witness
testimony, heard conflicting views about Canada’s readiness for MAID MD-SUMC. While some
witnesses said Canada is clearly ready, others stated that preparations are still in progress, or that
the state of the country’s readiness for 17 March 2024 is difficult to ascertain. Still others felt that
readiness for MAID MD- SUMC will never be attained.
The evidence heard by the committee clearly demonstrates that governments, regulators,
professional associations, and practitioners have worked very hard to prepare for MAID MD-SUMC
and have made significant progress. The federal government has responded to the call to support
the development of both model practice standards and an accredited training program for MAID
assessors and providers. Data collection requirements are in place at the federal level. At the
provincial level, the model practice standards are being adopted or adapted, and work on clinical
practice guidelines, research, professional development opportunities, and oversight mechanisms
is ongoing.
Nevertheless, the committee also heard significant testimony that some stakeholders perceive a
lack of readiness to proceed with MAID MD-SUMC at this time. Many practitioners remain
concerned, particularly regarding the challenges of assessing irremediability, distinguishing
requests for MAID MD-SUMC from suicidality, and protecting the most vulnerable in our society.
The committee agrees with the many witnesses who emphasized that the suffering of individuals
with mental disorders is no less important than the suffering of those with physical conditions, and
is deserving of relief.2 However, for the reasons outlined in this report, the committee has
concluded that Canada is not yet ready to proceed with MAID MD-SUMC.
BACKGROUND
In 2021, the passage of Bill C-7, An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying),
provided a pathway to MAID for those whose natural death is not reasonably foreseeable,
commonly referred to as “track two.”3 Bill C-7 included a provision prohibiting MAID where mental
disorder is the sole underlying medical condition (MAID MD-SUMC) for a period of two years—until
17 March 2023. During the two-year period, the presence of a mental disorder did not prevent a
person from accessing MAID, provided that they also had a qualifying condition.
Bill C-7 required that an independent expert review be carried out “respecting recommended
protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to requests made for medical assistance in dying by
persons who have a mental illness” (clause 3.1). That review was carried out by the Expert Panel on
MAiD and Mental Illness, which released its final report in May 2022.4
Bill C-7 also required the establishment of this committee to review the Criminal Code’s MAID
provisions and their application, as well as various MAID-related issues, including mental illness.
The committee’s interim report of June 2022 focused on MAID MD-SUMC. While it did not contain
recommendations, it concluded that:5
We must have standards of practice, clear guidelines, adequate training for practitioners,
comprehensive patient assessments and meaningful oversight in place for the case of MAID MD-
SUMC. This task will require the efforts and collaboration of regulators, professional associations,
institutional committees and all levels of government and these actors need to be engaged and
supported in this important work.
The committee’s final report for that review, tabled in February 2023, also emphasized the
importance of standards of practice being in place prior to MAID MD-SUMC being permitted:6
While the committee supports MAID MD-SUMC, it is concerned that there has not been sufficient
time to develop the standards of practice referred to by the Expert Panel [on MAID and Mental
Illness]. Witnesses were clear that these standards are key to ensuring a thoughtful, consistent
approach to MAID MD-SUMC.
While the committee’s review was ongoing, stakeholders raised concerns that the health care
system would not be prepared to safely and consistently provide MAID MD-SUMC by the 17 March
2023 deadline set out in Bill C-7. To address those concerns, the law was amended by Bill C-39, An
Act to amend An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying), to delay the
availability of MAID MD-SUMC until 17 March 2024.7
In June 2023, Quebec amended its assisted dying law, the Act respecting end-of-life care, to
prohibit requests for MAID based on a mental disorder other than a neurocognitive disorder, among
other changes.8
EVIDENCE OF READINESS
Practice Standards
Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying
The first recommendation of the Expert Panel on MAiD and Mental Illness (Expert Panel) in its 2022
report called for the development of “Standards of Practice for physicians and nurse practitioners
for the assessment of MAiD requests in situations that raise questions about incurability,
irreversibility, capacity, suicidality, and the impact of structural vulnerabilities.”9
As mentioned above, this committee previously recognized the need for these standards to be in
place before proceeding with MAID MD-SUMC.
Health Canada established the MAID Practice Standards Task Group (Task Group) to “create
resources that could be used by regulators to operationalize the Expert Panel’s guidance with
respect to … challenging MAID requests.”10
The Task Group published the Model Practice Standard for MAID (the Model Practice Standard),11 a
non-binding template for provinces and territories, in March 2023. Both the Task Group’s chair, Dr.
Mona Gupta, Psychiatrist and Researcher, Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, who
appeared before the committee as an individual, and Dr. Douglas Grant, Registrar and Chief
Executive Officer of the Federation of Medical Regulatory Authorities of Canada (FMRAC), who
represented FRMAC on the Task Group, confirmed that regulators had reviewed the Model Practice
Standard and were either adopting it or adapting it within their jurisdiction.12
A number of aspects of the Model Practice Standard come from the Criminal Code provisions on
MAID, such as the requirements to have two independent assessors and to ensure that the request
for MAID is voluntary. The Model Practice Standard also sets out guidance relating to suicidality,
including that
[a]ssessors and providers must take steps to ensure that the person’s request for MAID is
consistent with the person’s values and beliefs, and is unambiguous, and enduring. They must
ensure it is rationally considered during a period of stability, and not during a period of crisis. This
may require serial assessments.13
Describing it as “the best synthesis of the law with the input of all necessary stakeholder voices,”
Dr. Grant explained that the Model Practice Standard contemplates MAID MD- SUMC cases and
provides guidance for cases where an individual’s natural death is not reasonably foreseeable.14
Dr. Grant expects that there will be substantial consistency of standards between provinces and
territories.15
Dr. Alison Freeland, Chair of the Board of Directors and Co-Chair of MAID Working Group for the
Canadian Psychiatric Association, told the committee that the Model Practice Standard and the
associated Advice to the Profession16 document “clearly articulate some of the things that need to
be carefully considered as part of an assessment,”17 and that “there's been a lot of thought and
attention to build those standards, disseminate them and provide advice.”18
However, Dr. Jitender Sareen, Physician, Department of Psychiatry from the University of Manitoba,
who was appearing on behalf of eight chairs of psychiatry, expressed concern that the Model
Practice Standard does not require a psychiatrist to be involved in the assessment of requests for
MAID MD-SUMC.19 Both Dr. Sareen and Dr. K. Sonu Gaind, Chief, Department of Psychiatry at
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre (appearing as an individual) were concerned that the Model
Practice Standard does not specify how many treatments an individual should receive;20 Dr. Gaind
was also concerned that it does not specify the length or type of treatment that should be
required.21
Provincial and Territorial Standards Relating to Medical Assistance in Dying
While the committee recognizes that the regulation of the medical profession falls clearly within
provincial jurisdiction, it also recognizes that practice standards are key to ensuring the safe and
adequate application of MAID MD-SUMC. While witnesses provided information to the committee
in relation to practice standards, the committee emphasizes that it did not review all provincial or
territorial practice standards or provincial readiness more generally. Instead, it focused its study on
the leadership role that the federal government has played in supporting the development of such
standards.
While discussing how the Model Practice Standard will be fully adopted in the Atlantic provinces,
Dr. Grant asserted that regulators are ready to safely provide MAID MD- SUMC.22
Dr. Stefanie Green, MAID Practitioner and Advisor to BC Ministry of Health, who appeared as an
individual, told the committee that clinical teams in a number of provinces have confirmed that
they are prepared for MAID MD-SUMC.23
In contrast, Dr. Mauril Gaudreault, President of the Collège des médecins du Québec, explained
that while guidelines were being developed and five criteria relating to MAID MD-SUMC had been
identified, more work was needed.24
Need for Guidelines
Dr. Tarek Rajji, Chair of the Medical Advisory Committee of the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health (CAMH) told the committee that while “the federal model practice standards are a good first
step,” health care professionals also need access to clinical practice guidelines (CPGs), which
currently do not exist for MAID MD-SUMC.25 While CAMH has been working with partners to
develop CPGs, the limited evidence on which to base their work and the lack of consensus is
challenging.26 Dr. Rajji indicated that more time and funding for collaboration was needed, but
could not provide a timeline on when the necessary guidance and resources would be ready to
provide MAID MD-SUMC.27
Training and Professional Development
Canadian MAiD Curriculum
The Canadian Association of MAiD Assessors and Providers (CAMAP) has developed a nationally
accredited, evidence-based training program to support the practice of MAID. Nurse practitioner
and vice-president of CAMAP Julie Campbell explained that “CAMAP does not take a position on
MAID MD-SUMC.”28 Launched in August 2023, the curriculum has eight topics, including one on
“MAiD & Mental Disorders.” The curriculum includes an online component and facilitated
discussions of case reviews. The curriculum’s development included input from experts and
individuals with lived experience, an assessment of training needs, and a review of other
jurisdictions. The Canadian Psychiatric Association was part of the curriculum steering committee.
The curriculum was piloted for feedback before its broader release.
Jocelyne Voisin, Assistant Deputy Minister, Strategic Policy Branch, Health Canada, told the
committee that as of 17 November 2023, 490 physicians, 132 psychiatrists and 279 nurse
practitioners had registered for the CAMAP curriculum, and that the number of registrants was
increasing.29
Dr. Gaind critiqued the CAMAP training program. In his opinion, it is not evidence-based and
includes misinformation and gaps: “The CAMAP curriculum dangerously doesn't teach assessors
how to distinguish suicidality from psychiatric MAID requests, but convinces them that they can …
Remarkably, the CAMAP suicide module neglects mentioning known risks to marginalized
populations.”30
Eleanor Gittens from the Canadian Psychological Association indicated that the Canadian
Psychological Association was not included in the development of the training modules, nor have
they been able to review them.31
Other Professional Development Initiatives and Guidance to the Profession
In addition to the Model Practice Standard, standards that have been established by different
regulatory authorities, and the CAMAP nationally accredited training program, the committee heard
that there are numerous opportunities for sharing knowledge and expertise about MAID
assessments. Dr. Freeland spoke about a conference which included discussions of suicide versus
MAID, research published in the peer-reviewed Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, and information
exchanged through various networks, including the Council of Psychiatric Associations and
coordinated hospital working groups.32 Dr. Gupta mentioned a national MAID MD-SUMC
preparatory workshop.33 Julie Campbell referred to CAMAP’s clinical guidance documents,
knowledge exchange workshops on clinician readiness and system readiness, and a fall
symposium on assessing MAID MD-SUMC requests.34 Dr. Claire Gamache, psychiatrist with the
Association des médecins psychiatres du Québec, noted that the Association’s annual conference
would include a session on MAID MD-SUMC.35
Oversight
Provincial Oversight
Oversight of MAID cases falls to the provinces and territories, and there is variation in the
mechanisms used in different jurisdictions. Dr. Gupta indicated that 90% of MAID cases take place
in a jurisdiction with a formal oversight process.36 Dr. Green told the committee that the working
group in British Columbia has proposed establishing a case review committee for all MAID MD-
SUMC cases, and that one of the regional health authorities in British Columbia already has a
similar system in place.37
Jocelyne Voisin from Health Canada also advised the committee that the department is working
with provinces and territories to share views on oversight mechanism consistency and best
practices.38
The Federal Regulations for the Monitoring of Medical Assistance in Dying
Data is also collected at the federal level under the Regulations for the Monitoring of Medical
Assistance in Dying,39 which Jocelyne Voisin indicated has been enhanced “to help determine the
presence of any inequalities or disadvantages in requests for the delivery of MAID.”40 Dr. Gaind
emphasized that socioeconomic data should also be collected to protect marginalized groups.41
ONGOING CONCERNS
Assessing Irremediability
To be eligible for MAID under the Criminal Code, a person must have a “grievous and irremediable
medical condition,” which is defined as “a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability” that
has led to an “advanced state of irreversible decline” and intolerable suffering.42
The Model Practice Standard for MAID provides the following definitions of “incurable” and
“irreversible:”
9.5.2 'Incurable' means there are no reasonable treatments remaining where reasonable is
determined by the clinician and person together exploring the recognized, available, and potentially
effective treatments in light of the person's overall state of health, beliefs, values, and goals of care.
9.6.4 'Irreversible' means there are no reasonable interventions remaining where reasonable is
determined by the clinician and person together exploring the recognized, available, and potentially
effective interventions in light of the person's overall state of health, beliefs, values, and goals of
care.43
The committee heard that it is difficult, if not impossible, to accurately predict the long- term
prognosis of a person with a mental disorder. Some witnesses took this to mean that irremediability
cannot be assessed with certainty, thereby indicating a lack of readiness for MAID MD-SUMC.44 In
addition, some witnesses opined that adequate criteria have not been established for determining
irremediability.45 According to Dr. Gaind, there is evidence that clinicians’ predictions are wrong
over half the time.46
On the other hand, Dr. Gupta pointed out that the difficulty of predicting a person’s long-term
prognosis is not unique to mental disorders, and applies to current track two cases as well:
There are many medical conditions for which prognostication is “difficult, if not impossible”, to
borrow the same language of the expert panel report, and yet we reason clinically about these
cases in full respect of the Criminal Code requirements.47
The committee heard that, in practice, a person would need to have a long, documented history of
failed treatment attempts in order to be found eligible for MAID MD-SUMC.48 Several witnesses
underscored that individuals in crisis would not be eligible.49 However, some witnesses noted that
Canada’s eligibility criteria do not require a person to exhaust all reasonable treatments, in contrast
to other countries.50
Distinguishing MAID Requests from Suicidality
Some witnesses told the committee that there is no way to distinguish requests for MAID MD-
SUMC from suicidality,51 while others asserted that there is a clear distinction between the two.52
Dr. Gupta acknowledged that suicidality is one symptom of “a small number of specific conditions,”
but believed there would be a subset of people capable of making an informed decision to seek
MAID despite having struggled with suicidality.53 Several witnesses noted that assessing suicidality
is already part of the MAID assessment process,54 and clinical medical practice generally.55 By
contrast, Dr. Gaind told the committee that the training medical practitioners receive to assess
suicidality does not equip them to distinguish requests for MAID from suicidality.56
Dr. Gordon Gubitz, Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Nova Scotia Health, told the
committee that training and other resources are available to help MAID assessors understand the
difference between suicidality and “a reasoned wish to die.”57 However, as noted above, other
witnesses described the available resources as inadequate or problematic.58
Lack of Professional Consensus
The committee heard that many psychiatrists do not support the practice of MAID MD- SUMC. A
range of statistics were put forward on this point, with some suggesting that the majority of
psychiatrists are not in favour of MAID MD-SUMC.59 However, some witnesses also pointed out
that there is no consensus on many existing medical practices,60 and that this is not generally
considered a justification for prohibition.61
Protecting the Vulnerable
Some witnesses expressed concern regarding the potential impacts of MAID MD-SUMC on
vulnerable groups, including women, Indigenous people, people with disabilities, people living in
poverty, and people in geographically underserved areas.62 According to Dr. Sareen, “there are
inadequate safeguards to protect vulnerable groups that are disproportionately affected by mental
disorders.”63 On the other hand, Shelley Birenbaum, Chair of the End of Life Working Group for the
Canadian Bar Association, opined that there are already significant protections for the vulnerable
built into the legal framework for MAID.64
The committee heard that people who have not received adequate treatment, or whose treatment
was not adequately documented, would not be eligible for MAID MD-SUMC.65
Dr. Rajji noted that the delivery of MAID MD-SUMC at this time risks exacerbating health
inequities.66
Some witnesses expressed concern about how socio-economic or psychosocial vulnerabilities
may contribute to requests for MAID MD-SUMC.67 Dr. Green underscored that people would not be
eligible for MAID MD-SUMC on the basis of socio-economic vulnerabilities, but acknowledged that
“people are quite complicated and it’s hard sometimes to discern which factors are involved.”68
As in previous studies, the committee heard about a lack of consultation with Indigenous Peoples
on MAID, and MAID MD-SUMC specifically.69 Jocelyne Voisin, however, told the committee that
consultation with Indigenous Peoples on MAID is ongoing.70
Charter Considerations
Legal experts’ opinions differed regarding the constitutional issues raised by MAID MD- SUMC.
According to some, the ongoing exclusion from MAID of people suffering solely from a mental
disorder risks violating the rights to equality, liberty and security of the person protected by the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the Charter).71 Others believed that the failure to afford
Criminal Code protections against death to the most vulnerable, including people with disabilities
and mental disorders, is itself discriminatory and unconstitutional.72
Myriam Wills, Counsel, Criminal Law Policy Section, Department of Justice told the committee that
there are Charter considerations supporting the constitutionality of both prohibiting and permitting
MAID MD-SUMC, as evidenced in the Charter statements for Bill C-7 and Bill C-39.73
Availability of Trained Practitioners
The committee heard differing views as to whether there are enough properly trained
practitioners—psychiatrists in particular—to safely and adequately provide MAID MD- SUMC.
As Sam Mikail, a psychologist with the Canadian Psychological Association, pointed out, the
answer to this question depends in part on the number of expected cases, about which there was
conflicting testimony.74 While several witnesses were of the view that very few people would in fact
be eligible for MAID MD-SUMC,75 others disagreed, noting that there has been increasing demand
in countries where MAID MD-SUMC has become available, and that approval rates in Canada will
be higher due to more relaxed eligibility criteria.76
Several witnesses indicated that the role of psychiatrists in the MAID process is primarily to provide
expert consultations, rather than to undertake assessments.77 The committee heard that
psychiatrists already have the skills and training necessary to act as expert consultants for MAID
requests involving mental illness, and have already been doing so for track two cases.78 It also
heard that “the complexities so often attributed to mental disorders are not, in fact, unique to
mental disorders and are already being handled in our MAID system today.”79
Jocelyne Voisin from Health Canada agreed, but noted that some provinces and territories have
expressed concerns about having enough trained professionals with mental health expertise for
track two assessments. Dr. Rajji affirmed the lack of such professionals for track two cases in
Ontario, stating that more time is needed to build a “community of practice.”80
The committee heard that a little over 100 psychiatrists out of 5000 in Canada (approximately 2%)
have signed up for the Canadian MAiD Curriculum.81 Some witnesses pointed out that, while this
seems like a small percentage, only 2% of Canadian physicians are MAID providers.82
Furthermore, it is normal for an innovative area of practice to begin with a small number of experts,
who then train and mentor others.83
Others disagreed that only a small number of psychiatrists will be needed for MAID MD- SUMC.84
In Dr. Sareen’s opinion, all psychiatrists will need training on how to address suicidality in the
context of mental disorder if MAID MD-SUMC is permitted.85
Dr. Freeland noted that being able to provide appropriate care to those who are found ineligible for
MAID is also an important aspect of readiness.86
CONCLUSION
As mentioned at the outset of this report, given the conflicting testimony before this committee
about whether Canada is ready to safely and adequately provide MAID MD- SUMC, the committee
makes the following recommendation:
Recommendation 1
WHEREAS the Committee concludes that the medical system in Canada is not prepared for
medical assistance in dying where mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition
(hereinafter “MAID MD-SUMC”), the committee recommends:
a. That MAID MD-SUMC should not be made available in Canada until the Minister of Health and
the Minister of Justice are satisfied, based on recommendations from their respective departments
and in consultation with their provincial and territorial counterparts and with Indigenous Peoples,
that it can be safely and adequately provided; and
b. That one year prior to the date on which it is anticipated that the law will permit MAID MD-SUMC,
pursuant to subparagraph (a), the House of Commons and the Senate re-establish the Special Joint
Committee on Medical Assistance In Dying in order to verify the degree of preparedness attained
for a safe and adequate application of MAID MD-SUMC.
1. Parliament of Canada, Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying, Medical
Assistance in Dying in Canada: Choices for Canadians, 1st Session, 44th Parliament, February
2023.
2. Parliament of Canada, Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD),
Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Shelley Birenbaum, Chair, End of Life Working Group, The Canadian
Bar Association); AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Dr. Tarek Rajji, Chair, Medical Advisory
Committee, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health; Dr. Mauril Gaudreault, President, Collège des
médecins du Québec).
3. Bill C-7, An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying), 43rd Parliament, 2nd
Session (S.C. 2021, c. 2). For more information about Bill C-7, see Julia Nicol and Marlisa
Tiedemann, Legislative Summary of Bill C-7: An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical
assistance in dying), Publication no. 43-2- C7-E, Library of Parliament, 19 April 2021.
4. Health Canada, Final Report of the Expert Panel on MAiD and Mental Illness, 13 May 2022.
5. Parliament of Canada, Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying, Medical
Assistance in Dying and Mental Disorder as the Sole Underlying Condition: An Interim Report, 1st
Session, 44th Parliament, June 2022, p. 20.
6. Parliament of Canada, Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying, Medical
Assistance in Dying in Canada: Choices for Canadians, 1st Session, 44th Parliament, February
2023, p. 53.
7. Bill C-39, An Act to amend An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying),
44th Parliament, 1st Session (S.C. 2023, c.1).
8. Quebec, Act respecting end-of-life care, c. S-32.0001, sections 26(4) and 29.1(2)(d)(ii), amended
by Assemblée nationale du Québec, Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting end-of-life care and
other legislative provisions, 43rd Legislature, 1st Session (S.Q. 2023, c. 15).
9. Health Canada, Final Report of the Expert Panel on MAiD and Mental Illness, 13 May 2022.
10. Health Canada, Background Document: The Work of the Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID)
Practice Standards Task Group.
11. Health Canada, Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID), March 2023.
12. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Dr. Mona Gupta, Psychiatrist and Researcher, Centre
hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, As an individual; Dr. Douglas Grant, Registrar and Chief
Executive Officer, Federation of Medical Regulatory Authorities of Canada).
13. Health Canada, Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID), March 2023.
14. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Grant).
15. Ibid.
16. Health Canada, Advice to the Profession: Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID).
17. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Dr. Alison Freeland, Chair of the Board of Directors and Co-
Chair of MAID Working Group, Canadian Psychiatric Association).
18. Ibid.
19. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Dr. Jitender Sareen, Physician, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Manitoba).
20. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Sareen); AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Dr. K. Sonu
Gaind, Chief, Department of Psychiatry, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, As an individual).
21. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind).
22. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Grant).
23. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Dr. Stefanie Green, MAID Practitioner, Advisor to BC
Ministry of Health).
24. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaudreault).
25. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Rajji).
26. Ibid.
27. Ibid.
28. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Julie Campbell, Nurse Practitioner, Canadian Association
of MAiD Assessors and Providers).
29. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Jocelyne Voisin, Assistant Deputy Minister, Strategic
Policy Branch, Department of Health).
30. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind).
31. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Dr. Eleanor Gittens, Member, Canadian Psychological
Association).
32. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Freeland).
33. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gupta).
34. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Campbell).
35 AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Dr. Claire Gamache, Psychiatrist, Association des médecins
psychiatres du Québec).
36. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gupta).
37. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Green).
38. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Voisin).
39. Regulations for the Monitoring of Medical Assistance in Dying, SOR/2018-166.
40. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Voisin).
41. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind).
42. Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, s. 241.2(2).
43. Health Canada, Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID), March 2023.
44. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Sareen); AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind).
45. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Sareen); AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind;
Rajji; H. Archibald Kaiser, Professor, Schulich School of Law and Department of Psychiatry, Faculty
of Medicine, As an individual).
46. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind).
47. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gupta).
48. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gupta; Gamache); AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023
(Green; Dr. Gordon Gubitz, Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Nova Scotia Health).
49. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gupta; Gamache); AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023
(Green).
50. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Dr. Trudo Lemmens, Professor, Scholl Chair, Health Law
and Policy, Faculty of Law, University of Toronto, As an individual; Sareen).
51. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Sareen); AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind;
Rajji).
52. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Green; Gubitz).
53. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gupta).
54. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gupta; Gamache).
55. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Birenbaum; Gupta; Gamache); AMAD, Evidence, 21
November 2023 (Green).
56. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind).
57. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Gubitz).
58. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind; Rajji).
59. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Sareen); AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind).
60. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Freeland); AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Green).
61. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Green).
62. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Lemmens; Sareen); AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023
(Kaiser; Gaind).
63. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Sareen).
64. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Birenbaum).
65. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gamache); AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Green).
66. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Rajji).
67. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Kaiser; Rajji; Gaind).
68. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Green).
69. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Kaiser).
70. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Voisin).
71. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Birenbaum); AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Dr.
Jocelyn Downie, Professor Emeritus, Health Law Institute, Dalhousie University, As an individual).
72. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Lemmens); AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Kaiser).
73. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Myriam Wills, Counsel, Criminal Law Policy Section,
Department of Justice).
74. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Dr. Sam Mikail, Psychologist, Canadian Psychological
Association).
75. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Freeland; Gupta; Gamache); AMAD, Evidence, 21
November 2023 (Downie; Voisin).
76. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Lemmens); AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Gaind).
77. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Freeland; Gupta); AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023
(Green).
78. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Freeland; Gupta; Gamache); AMAD, Evidence, 21
November 2023 (Green, Campbell).
79. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gupta); See also: AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023
(Voisin; Campbell).
80. AMAD, Evidence, 28 November 2023 (Rajji).
81. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Voisin).
82. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Gupta); AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Green).
83. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Freeland; Gupta; Gamache); AMAD, Evidence, 21
November 2023 (Green).
84. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Lemmens; Sareen).
85. AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023 (Sareen).
86. AMAD, Evidence, 7 November 2023 (Freeland); See also: AMAD, Evidence, 21 November 2023
(Gubitz).
APPENDIX A: LIST OF WITNESSES
The following table lists the witnesses who appeared before the committee at its meetings related
to this report. Transcripts of all public meetings related to this report are available on the
committee’s webpage for this study.
Organizations and Individuals
Date
Meeting
As an individual
Dr. Mona Gupta, Psychiatrist and Researcher, Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal
2023/11/07
38
Association des médecins psychiatres du Québec
Dr. Claire Gamache, Psychiatrist
2023/11/07
38
Canadian Psychiatric Association
Dr. Alison Freeland, Chair of the Board of Directors and Co- Chair of MAID Working Group
2023/11/07
38
Federation of Medical Regulatory Authorities of Canada
Dr. Douglas Grant, Registrar and Chief Executive Officer
2023/11/07
38
The Canadian Bar Association
Shelley Birenbaum, Chair, End of Life Working Group
2023/11/07
38
As an individual
Dr. Jocelyn Downie, Professor Emeritus, Health Law Institute, Dalhousie University
Dr. Pierre Gagnon, Director of Department of Psychiatry and Neurosciences, Université Laval
Dr. Stefanie Green, President,
MAID Practitioner, Advisor to BC Ministry of Health
Dr. Trudo Lemmens, Professor,
Scholl Chair, Health Law and Policy, Faculty of Law, University of Toronto
2023/11/21
39
Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and Providers
Julie Campbell, Nurse Practitioner
2023/11/21
39
Organizations and Individuals
Date
Meeting
Department of Health
Jocelyne Voisin, Assistant Deputy Minister, Strategic Policy Branch
2023/11/21
39
Department of Justice
Myriam Wills, Counsel, Criminal Law Policy Section
2023/11/21
39
Nova Scotia Health
Dr. Gordon Gubitz ,
Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine
2023/11/21
39
University of Manitoba
Dr. Jitender Sareen, Physician, Department of Psychiatry
2023/11/21
39
As an individual
Dr. K. Sonu Gaind, Chief,
Department of Psychiatry, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre
H. Archibald Kaiser, Professor,
Schulich School of Law and Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine (Cross-Appointment),
Dalhousie University
2023/11/28
40
Canadian Psychological Association
Dr. Eleanor Gittens, Member Dr. Sam Mikail, Psychologist
2023/11/28
40
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
Dr. Tarek Rajji, Chair, Medical Advisory Committee
2023/11/28
40
Collège des médecins du Québec
Dr. Mauril Gaudreault, President Dr. André Luyet, Psychiatrist
2023/11/28
40
REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT RESPONSE
Pursuant to Standing Order 109, the committee requests that the government table a
comprehensive response to this report.
A copy of the relevant Minutes of Proceedings (Meetings Nos. 37 to 42) is tabled.
Respectfully submitted,
René Arseneault and Hon. Yonah Martin Joint Chairs
Dissenting Opinion
The Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying January 24, 2024
We are submitting this dissenting opinion because we believe that all levels of healthcare, including
the choice of end-of-life care, should be safe and equitable for all Canadians.
This dissenting opinion addresses the mandate given to the Special Joint Committee on Medical
Assistance in Dying (AMAD, October 2023), evaluating the Government of Canada criteria for MAID
MD-SUMC preparedness. We are aware that different Provinces and Territories may choose to
make other stipulations related to their responsibilities in the delivery of end-of-life health care in
their jurisdiction. This committee was not mandated to address such possibilities. We believe that
the committee did not appropriately fulfill its mandate.
Our Recommendation
That the majority report of Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD) not be
accepted by the Government of Canada.
Introduction
The following dissenting opinion is authored by three independent senators of the total five senator
members of the AMAD committee from October 2023 until December 2023. This dissenting opinion
is supported by two additional independent senators who participated in some meetings. Four of
these Senators are medical doctors with personal and professional expertise in medical training
and the delivery of medical care.
This dissenting opinion focuses on the medical and procedural aspects of the deliberations. We are
supportive of an additional dissenting report that focuses on legal and constitutional aspects.
Background
On February 15, 2023, the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD) tabled
its final report, which addressed numerous topics related to medical assistance in dying (MAiD) in
Canada, including, but not limited to, advance requests, mature minors, and mental disorders. This
report recognized that some mental disorders were irremediable and intolerable, and that persons
whose sole underlying condition was a mental disorder (MD- SUMC) should not be excluded from
applying for MAiD should they meet the criteria that applies to all other Canadians. It did not
challenge the court decisions related to MAID MD- SUMC (including Carter, Alberta, and Truchon),
and it acknowledged the Expert Panel Report on MAiD and Mental Illness and the four preparedness
criteria that comprised the Federal
Government’s commitment to MAiD MD-SUMC.
The federal government undertook four activities to address preparedness for MAiD MD- SUMC.
These preparedness criteria are outlined in the October 20, 2022 Government Response to AMAD’s
interim report, presented to the house on June 22, 2022:
1. The Expert Panel Report on MAiD and Mental Illness was commissioned and issued its report on
May 13, 2022.
2. Monitoring and reporting on MAiD in Canada: that revised reporting regulations be developed for
data collection.
3. Training: that an accredited training program addressing MAiD for physicians and nurse
practitioners be developed and available across Canada.
4. Developmental Practice Standards: that model MAiD practice standards be developed for
physician and nurse regulators across the country.
As only one of these criteria had been realized as of February 2023 (criteria one) the committee
recommended that MAiD MD-SUMC be delayed for one year to allow the completion of the other
three criteria.
Subsequently, Bill C-39 (passed on March 9, 2023) provided an extension period for MAiD MD-
SUMC until March 17, 2024, so that the three remaining criteria could be completed.
Additionally, the February 2023 report recommended that the committee be re-established five
months before the March 2024 deadline to determine if the three remaining preparedness criteria
had been completed. On October 31, 2023, the committee was reconvened. It was mandated to
determine the degree of preparedness attained for a safe and adequate application of MAiD MD-
SUMC. The committee’s scope was circumscribed and specific: to determine if the federal
government had met its obligation in completing the three remaining preparedness criteria. The
committee was not mandated to revisit arguments against MAiD MD-SUMC or relitigate MAiD MD-
SUMC.
The Criminal Code of Canada falls under the jurisdiction of the Federal Government, and changes
to the Code have decriminalized the application of MAiD in regulated health care settings in
Canada. Health care provision is primarily a provincial and territorial jurisdiction, and as such,
provinces and territories are responsible for implementation and delivery of health services,
including end of life care. This includes the application of MAiD-related health system regulation
and care delivery standards. This has been demonstrated in the province of Quebec where the
government has brought forward legislation in relation to MAiD provision.
The committee failed to address its mandate.
1. The committee did not properly evaluate whether the three remaining Government of Canada
defined preparedness criteria had been completed:
a. It only held three meetings to hear from witnesses regarding the achievement of the
preparedness criteria and in those hearings heard from witnesses that had no knowledge about
completion of these preparedness criteria.
b. It did not invite medical regulators and MAiD providers from all provinces and territories to speak
about health system preparedness in terms of the preparedness criteria.
c. It invited 23 individuals1 who represented themselves or organizations.
i. Of the 21 witnesses that spoke during committee meetings, 15 had extensive knowledge of the
preparedness criteria and preparedness activities.
ii. Of the 21 witnesses that spoke during committee meetings, five did not have extensive
knowledge of preparedness activities, and were not involved in any preparedness activities.
d. The committee heard from five witnesses that used previous arguments against MAiD track two,
and MAiD MD-SUMC in general—not on the mandated topic of realization of the preparedness
criteria.
2. The majority report recommended “that the medical system in Canada is not prepared for MAiD
where mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition… based on recommendations from
their respective departments and in consultation with their respective provincial and territorial
counterparts and with Indigenous peoples” but this recommendation could not be made based on
the evidence it heard. Such a recommendation should be invalid, because:
a. The committee did not study “Canada’s medical system.”
b. The committee did not hear from all provincial and/or territorial regulators or MAiD providers.
c. The committee did not hear from Indigenous peoples.
The majority report made errors in weighing evidence.
The committee heard testimony from 21 individuals and organizations who spoke as witnesses over
the course of three meetings. The committee heard from 15 witnesses who had fulsome knowledge
of the completion of the preparedness criteria and each witness testified that all the preparedness
criteria had been met. However, the majority report disregarded this testimony and instead chose
to prioritize the testimony of five witnesses who either opposed MAiD MD- SUMC or had little or no
knowledge of the preparedness criteria. Therefore, the majority report chose to ignore the most
pertinent and compelling evidence regarding the federal government’s own criteria for
preparedness.
Witnesses Asserted Preparedness Criteria Completed Said Canada wasn’t
ready
Canadian Psychiatric Association
(Dr. Alison Freeland) X
Canadian Bar Association
(Shelley Birenbaum) X
Dr. Mona Gupta X
Association des médecins psychiatres du Québec
(Dr. Claire Gamache) X
Federation of Medical Regulatory Authorities of Canada
(Dr. Douglas Grant) X
Dr. Jocelyn Downie X
Trudo Lemmens X
Dr. Stefanie Green X
Dr. Pierre Gagnon X
Department of Justice
(Myriam Wills) X
Department of Health
(Jocelyne Voisin) X
(+ 2 other witnesses who did not speak)
University of Manitoba
Witnesses Asserted Preparedness Criteria Completed Said Canada wasn’t
ready
(Dr. Jitender Sareen) X
Nova Scotia Health
(Dr. Gordon Gubitz) X
The Canadian Association of MAiD Assessors and Providers
(Julie Campbell, NP) X
H. Archibald Kaiser X
Dr. K. Sonu Gaind X
Canadian Psychological Association
(Dr. Eleanor Gittens and Dr. Sam Mikail) X
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
(Dr. Tarek Rajji)2 * *
Collège des médecins du Québec
(Dr. André Luyet and Dr. Mauril Gaudreault) X
For example, Dr. Mona Gupta chaired the Expert Panel on MAiD and Mental Illness, was involved in
provincial MAiD MD-SUMC protocol development, the development of the Model MAiD practice
standards, and the development of the accredited national training program by CAMAP. She
asserted that “the activities to allow the safe and adequate assessment and provision of MAiD MD-
SUMC, within federal jurisdiction, have been underway for almost three years and are now
complete.”
Dr. Jocelyn Downie, who was involved in the development of Model MAiD practice standards and
the CAMAP training program, told the committee that “robust statutory, monitoring, regulatory, and
clinical preparedness has been demonstrated” and reminded members that political preparedness
is not a justification for limiting the charter rights of those intolerably suffering from a mental
disorder.
Nurse Practitioner Julie Campbell, who represented CAMAP, indicated that “all of the federal
government’s activities indicative of readiness for MAiD MD-SUMC have been completed.”
Dr. Douglas Grant, the registrar of the college of physicians in Nova Scotia who represented the
Federation of Medical Regulatory Authorities of Canada, said “all readiness must be built on
regulatory readiness” and affirmed that “regulators are ready for this. We don’t need any more
time…we have a solemn and legal duty to be ready.”
Dr. Stefanie Green, an experienced MAiD provider and founding president of CAMAP, assured the
committee that “very clearly, there is a high degree of preparedness…there is readiness at the
federal level, there are provincial, territorial and regional initiatives that have occurred and
continue, and there is preparedness of the medical and nursing regulatory bodies as well as
professional associations.”
These are only some examples of testimony that affirmed the completion of the four readiness
criteria required to demonstrate preparedness.
Of the remaining five witnesses who spoke against preparedness, none represented regulatory
bodies, provincial/territorial health care systems or the accrediting authorities responsible for
health care standards, nor were they involved in the development of any of the preparedness
components.
The committee denied Canadians’ right to contribute to its deliberations
In parliamentary committees, briefs submitted by members of the public are important pieces of
evidence that must be considered by the committee. In AMAD’s past session in 2022, the
committee received hundreds of briefs which were considered as testimony and referenced in the
committee’s report.
The committee asked Canadians to submit briefs pertinent and relevant to the mandate of the
committee, and assured them that they would be welcomed, accepted, and considered. The
committee received hundreds of submissions, not all of which were briefs addressing its mandate.
We are aware of some briefs that were submitted to the committee before the noted due date, by
leading provincial and territorial experts that spoke directly to provincial health system readiness.
However, the committee chose to not use these briefs, and the majority report wrongly dismisses
them.
The committee did not call witnesses from each province and territory to discuss MAiD MD- SUMC
readiness in their jurisdiction, and therefore, can make no comments about health system
readiness across Canada. Briefs from provincial and territorial regulators and MAiD providers would
have been essential to getting the information needed to consider readiness in provincial and
territorial jurisdictions. A number of briefs that were not considered by the committee clearly noted
that readiness for MAID MDSUMC had already been reached in a number of provinces, some four
months prior to the legislated date.
Essential evidence of preparedness was not considered, as members of the committee chose to
use only witness testimony during committee meetings as evidence in the final report. Yet, the
majority report did not consider pertinent testimony available in briefs related to preparedness that
some members of the committee read into the evidence during public hearings and witness
testimony. The evidence found in the briefs clearly contradicts the majority report’s
recommendation.
Discrediting Canada’s medical education accreditation process
All medical training is accredited under the authority of the Royal College of Physicians and
Surgeons (RCPS) and the College of Family Physicians and Surgeons of Canada (CFPSC). A MAiD
training program was developed by the Canadian Association of MAiD Assessors and Providers
(CAMAP) and accredited by the CFPSC and the RCPS. Individual clinicians may hold opinions about
any medical training program, but it is the authority and responsibility of the accrediting bodies to
determine if training has met national standards, not the opinion of any clinician.
One witness testified against the accredited MAID training program and may have misled the
committee about the quality, nature, and content of the accredited training program and stated
negative personal opinions about it. The committee report then chose to discredit the
professionally accredited program based on one witness’s personal opinion. This will have a
profound and negative consequence for how medical education is developed, accredited, and
delivered in Canada.
Additional considerations
It is also worth noting three other major themes which were present in many of the committee’s
public deliberations. First, the issue of consensus was repeatedly used as an argument against
MAiD MD-SUMC. However, in medicine, there is no requirement for consensus, and there no
consensus within the medical profession on medical assistance in dying in general. Therefore, the
committee report, in its demand of consensus in MAiD MD- SUMC, is setting a standard that is
discriminatory for people with a mental disorder.
Second, the majority report contains a section titled ‘ongoing concerns.’ This section was not
relevant to the very specific mandate of the committee—to determine if preparedness criteria had
been met—and instead attempted to relitigate and rehash track two MAiD and MAiD MD- SUMC
discussions that had been addressed in previous committee reports. This illustrated the
committees repeated failure to address its own mandate and is contrary to the final report tabled
on February 15, 2023.
Finally, prejudice and stigma against people with mental disorders has been reinforced by this
committee’s majority report and as a result of this flawed process, Canadians will continue to be
deprived of their Charter rights regarding end-of-life care. The paternalistic view that all competent
people with mental disorders are unable to make informed decisions about their medical care is
archaic, not aligned with reality, and condescending. Any person who is deemed capable and
meets the eligibility criteria for MAiD MD-SUMC should not be excluded from the care that is offered
to all other Canadians. However, this determination was not the mandate of this committee—
assessing preparedness was—and experts have indeed confirmed that the preparedness criteria
established by the federal government have been achieved. Thus, from the perspective of criminal
law of Canada, Canadians should no longer be excluded from decisions regarding MAID as an end-
of-life choice. Our concern lies in the fact that individuals enduring profound suffering without
seeing an end to their distress, as well as those who have been victims of discrimination due to the
type of illness they have, are now facing additional discrimination in how they wish to die.
Conclusion
The committee failed to do its work objectively and in an unbiased manner, it did not address its
mandate, and its majority report recommendation is thus invalid. It failed to:
Properly evaluate if the federal government’s preparedness criteria had been achieved.
Allow enough time to hear from knowledgeable witnesses regarding the achievement of the
preparedness criteria.
Invite medical regulators and MAiD providers from all provinces and territories to speak about
health system preparedness in provincial and territorial jurisdictions.
Weigh evidence properly. It chose to prioritize testimony from witnesses who were not themselves
involved in preparedness activities.
The committee heard from many witnesses that simply argued against MAiD track two, and MAiD
MD-SUMC in general and did not speak on the mandated topic of preparedness.
The majority report endorsed testimony from one witness who created their own criteria of
preparedness not supported by any other witness testimony and not identified by the federal
government as part of its preparedness criteria.
Unfortunately, the majority report accepted the negative, biased, and subjective testimony of a
single individual regarding the accredited MAiD training program over the many witnesses who
objectively and positively testified to the preparedness, quality and availability of the accredited
MAiD training program.
The majority report did not consider essential evidence made available in briefs related to
provincial preparedness.
Contrary to accepted process, the majority report did not utilize briefs addressing its mandate in its
deliberations that had been submitted in good faith within the deadline for their acceptance.
When MAiD was first made available in Canada, there was no discussion of ‘preparedness.’
Physicians, health systems administrators and regulators worked quickly and effectively to learn
the necessary procedures, create standards of care, and establish clinical pathways. Nor was there
any medical practitioner consensus that MAiD should be provided. The demand for preparedness
for MAiD MD-SUMC stands in sharp contrast to that historical reality and can perhaps be best
understood as discrimination and stigma against those who live with and suffer from a mental
disorder.
Therefore, we recommend, to ensure equitable and safe access to healthcare for all Canadians,
that this report of Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD) not be accepted
by the federal government.
Furthermore, should the Government of Canada seek extension of the exclusion of persons whose
sole underlying condition is a mental disorder from accessing MAiD, it should do so concurrently
with a referral to the Supreme Court of Canada.
GLOSSARY:
AMAD: The acronym for the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying
MAiD MD-SUMC: Medical assistance in dying for persons whose sole underlying condition is a
mental disorder.
TRACK ONE: a track one MAiD request is a request from a person whose death is reasonably
foreseeable and meets all the other eligibility criteria.
TRACK TWO: a track two MAiD request is a request from a person whose death is not reasonably
foreseeable but meets all the other eligibility criteria.
A GREVIOUS AND IRREMEDIABLE MEDICAL CONDITION: According to the health law institute at
Dalhousie University, this is a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability that leaves a
person in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability. The illness, disease, or disability or
that state of decline causes enduring physical or psychological suffering that is intolerable and that
cannot be relieved under conditions that the person consider acceptable
PREPAREDNESS ACTIVITIES: The four activities that the federal government undertook to ensure
preparedness under federal jurisdictions.
1. The Expert Panel Report on MAiD and Mental Illness was commissioned.
2. Monitoring and reporting on MAiD in Canada: that revised reporting regulations be developed for
data collection.
3. Training: that an accredited training program addressing MAiD for physicians and nurse
practitioners be developed and available across Canada.
4. Developmental Practice Standards: that model MAiD practice standards be developed for
physician and nurse regulators across the country.
CAMAP: The Canadian Association of MAiD Assessors and Providers
RCPS: The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons
CFPSC: The College of Family Physicians and Surgeons of Canada
Respectfully submitted,
The Honourable Stan Kutcher, Senator Nova Scotia
The Honourable Marie-Françoise Mégie, Senator Quebec
The Honourable Pamela Wallin, Senator Saskatchewan
With support from
The Honourable Flordeliz (Gigi) Osler Manitoba
The Honourable Mohamed-Iqbal Ravalia Newfoundland and Labrador
1. 23 individuals who represented either themselves or organizations appeared as witnesses before
the AMAD committee between October and December 2023. Each of these individuals are listed
below. However, only 21 individuals spoke at committee meetings. Section 1 (c) (ii) on page three
describes the positions of the 21 witnesses that spoke. The table below lists the positions of all 23
witnesses based on their testimony and/or submissions made to the committee.
2. Testimony from Dr. Rajji who was representing CAMH did not oppose the preparedness criteria
established by the Federal Government. Instead, he called for additional guidelines to be
completed by CAMH. Clinical guidelines, however, are not the responsibility of the Federal
Government but rather that of credible national medical associations. Therefore, CAMH’s testimony
is not contradictory to the federal government’s criteria of preparedness. If any province or territory
wishes to impose additional criteria for preparedness in its area of jurisdiction, it can choose to do
so. This would not mean that the federal government’s criteria for preparedness have not been
achieved.
DISSENTING OPINION OF SENATOR DALPHOND
INTRODUCTION
1. A large majority of Canadians want the possibility of accessing medical assistance in dying
(MAID), in well-defined circumstances, including for a severe, treatment-resistant mental illness for
which individuals experience intolerable suffering, according to a January 2023 poll.1 For most
Canadians, it is a question of dignity and autonomy.
BACKGROUND ON EXCLUSION OF MENTAL ILLNESS FROM MAID ACCESS
2. In Carter v. Canada (Attorney General) (2015), the Supreme Court of Canada ruled on a
constitutional challenge to the criminal prohibition on MAID initiated four years earlier, with the trial
having proceeded on an expedited basis. The Court stated that section 7 of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms protects Canadians’ right to decide about end-of-life issues and that
provisions of the Criminal Code preventing MAID were unconstitutional, granting Parliament one
year to legislate accordingly. The Court also said that MAID for persons with psychiatric disorders
as a sole condition did not fall within the parameters of its reasons despite arguments presented by
the Attorney General of Canada on that issue.
3. In June 2016, Parliament adopted Government Bill C-14, which amended the Criminal Code to
allow access to MAID for people suffering from an irremediable illness and whose death is
reasonably foreseeable.
4. In Truchon c. Procureur général du Canada (2019), in the context of another constitutional
challenge, the Quebec Superior Court concluded that access to MAID could not be restricted to
those whose death is reasonably foreseeable.
5. In response, the Government tabled Bill C-7 which extended access to people who are not
terminally ill, but who suffer from an irremediable condition that has become unbearable for them.
However, this bill specifically excluded all individuals suffering solely from an irremediable mental
illness.
6. As stated in the Charter Statement tabled in the House of Commons on October 21, 2020, the
exclusion was not based on the assumption that these individuals lack decision-making capacity
and thus would not disqualify them from eligibility for MAID if they have another medical condition
that was considered to be a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability. Rather, it was based
on assumptions of complexity and inherent risks of access to MAID for these individuals, such as
difficulty in assessing decision-making capacity, lesser predictability over time of the course of
mental illness than physical illness, and certain recent cases in the few countries that permitted
MAID for people whose sole medical condition was a mental illness.
7. These assumptions were then widely accepted by the political parties in the House of Commons.
8. For its part, after reviewing the question, the Senate adopted an amendment to subject the
exclusion to a sunset clause of 18 months, a period to provide for proper guidelines and training.
9. In moving the amendment, Senator Kutcher stated: “[T]he exclusion [clause] is stigmatizing,
discriminatory, and thus likely unconstitutional.”
10. In support of that amendment, I said:
We have also heard that it does not make sense to exclude Canadians suffering solely from mental
illness while allowing access for those who may suffer both from a mental and physical illness. In
these cases, capacity assessments must also be performed, and it seems it can be done without
much difficulty in practice.
In reality, as many witnesses have said, the proposed exclusion reinforces, perpetuates or
exacerbates myths and biases about mental illness, including that the suffering of those with
mental illnesses is somewhat less legitimate than that of physical conditions and that people with
mental illnesses lack the agency or capacity to make decisions about their own suffering.
11. As proposed by the Government, a majority of the House of Commons accepted the Senate’s
amendment, but extended the sunset clause to 24 months.
12. The House of Commons also added an obligation for the Minister of Health and the Minister of
Justice to initiate an independent expert panel “respecting recommended protocols, guidance and
safeguards to apply to requests made for medical assistance in dying by persons who have a
mental illness.”
13. On May 13, 2022, the Panel’s final report was published. The Panel concluded that existing
MAID eligibility criteria and safeguards, buttressed by the existing laws, standards, and practices in
related areas of healthcare, can provide an adequate structure for MAID where the sole underlying
condition is mental illness. However, it recommended that specialized training be made available
to providers and assessors before allowing access.
14. In March 2023, through Bill C-39, Parliament extended the sunset clause by one year, ending on
March 17, 2024. In bringing forward Bill C-39, the Government indicated that such extension would
help ensure health care system readiness by, among other things, allowing more time for the
dissemination and uptake of key resources by the medical and nursing communities, including
MAID assessors and providers.
15. In the Charter Statement tabled in the House of Commons on February 15, 2023, the Minister of
Justice acknowledged that Bill C-39, by temporarily prohibiting access to MAID where the sole
condition identified is a mental illness, had the potential to engage liberty and security of these
individuals protected by section 7 of the Charter. It also had the potential to engage the right to
equality under section 15 because the exclusion applies only to individuals who suffer from a
mental illness.
16. As a Quebec senator, I cannot ignore that in its December 2021 report, the National Assembly's
Select Committee on the Evolution of the Act respecting end-of-life care recommended against
extending access to MAID to people whose only medical problem is a mental illness. The
committee made this recommendation in keeping with the precautionary principle that Quebec
has favoured since the beginning of its work on MAID, considering the lack of medical and social
consensus. In June 2023, the National Assembly adopted Bill 11, amending the Act respecting end-
of-life care, to exclude MAID solely for a mental illness.
17. Finally recent debates in the House of Commons on failed private Member’s Bill C-314
highlighted the fact that many MPs still want to permanently exclude MAID access to people
suffering solely from a mental illness, for the same reasons that were invoked to justify the
exclusion initially found in Bill C-7.
THIS COMMITTEE'S LIMITED MANDATE
18. As suggested at recommendation 13 of the previous report of this Special Joint Committee, the
Committee was re-established in October 2023 to verify the degree of preparedness attained for a
safe and adequate application of MAID where mental disorder is the sole underlying medical
condition.
19. This limited mandate precludes any consideration of access to MAID via advance requests,
applicable in well-defined circumstances, such as a diagnosis of an irreversible disease like
Alzheimer's. According to a 2022 poll, 85 percent of Canadians support advance requests for those
with a grievous and irremediable medical condition. Hopefully such a task will be mandated to the
Special Joint Committee in the near future.
THIS COMMITTEE UNFORTUNATELY VEERED OFF COURSE
20. To respect its limited mandate of verification of the degree of preparedness attained for a safe
and adequate application of MAID where mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition,
the Special Joint Committee had to focus on testimony from representatives of associations of
doctors, nurses and others involved in the provision of MAID (who said they were ready), of
provincial oversight bodies (who said that appropriate measures were in place to ensure proper
application of the provisions of the Criminal Code), and of organizations involved in training the
people providing MAID (who described the special training provided).
21. For details on this evidence, I refer to the detailed analysis included in the attached dissenting
report of some of my Senate colleagues, essentially a group of experts in the provision of health
care.
22. Despite that, the majority report concludes that the medical system in Canada is not prepared
for MAID where mental disorder is the sole underlying condition. It comes to that conclusion by
giving substantial weight, maybe too much, to the testimony of individuals who have long opposed
any broadening of access to MAID.
23. Based on that disputable conclusion, the report recommends a blanket exclusion until the
Minister of Health and the Minister of Justice are satisfied, based on recommendations from their
respective departments and in consultation with their provincial and territorial counterparts and
with Indigenous peoples, that MAID can be safely and adequately provided.
24. Furthermore, the report recommends that one year prior to the date on which it is anticipated
that the law will permit MAID to such a group of individuals, the House of Commons and the Senate
re-establish the Special Joint Committee on MAID to verify the degree of preparedness attained for
safe and adequate application of MAID where mental illness is the sole underlying medical
condition.
25. In other words, the majority is proposing a blanket indeterminate exclusion of access to MAID
for all individuals who meet all the stringent requirements of paragraph 241.2 of the Criminal Code
where mental illness is the sole underlying medical condition.
26. In my view, this recommendation stems largely from a belief that there is a lack of sufficient
medical and social consensus in Canada for access to MAID on the sole ground of a mental illness,
rather than the standalone evidence on preparedness.
27. Furthermore, this alleged lack of social acceptability is questionable. Indeed, a January 2023
poll indicated that 82 percent of Canadians agree that with the appropriate safeguards in place, an
adult with the capacity to provide informed consent should be able to seek an assessment for
medical assistance in dying for a severe, treatment- resistant mental illness for which they
experience intolerable suffering. This support comprises 34% who strongly support and 48% who
somewhat support such access.
28. In short, the Special Joint Committee’s report moved away, consciously or unconsciously, from
its mandate of verifying the preparedness of regulators and those involved in the assessment and
provision of MAID. Rather, the focus of the majority was on a lack of medical and social consensus
on ending the exclusion.
A CONSTITUTIONAL RECOMMENDATION?
29. In the Charter Statement on Bill -39 referred to above, the Justice Minister acknowledged that
adding one year to the sunset clause to extend for that period the prohibition on access to MAID,
where the sole condition identified is a mental illness, had the potential to engage the liberty and
security right of these individuals protected by section 7 of the Charter, as well as the right not to be
discriminated against, protected at section 15, because the exclusion applies only to individuals
who suffer from a mental illness.
30. To now recommend a blanket and indeterminate exclusion for the same group of persons
engages the protected rights of these individuals to an even greater degree and, in my opinion, is
likely to be declared unconstitutional.
31. In Carter (2015), the Supreme Court of Canada stated unanimously:
[115] […] Based on the evidence regarding assessment processes in comparable end-of-life
medical decision-making in Canada, the trial judge concluded that vulnerability can be assessed
on an individual basis, using the procedures that physicians apply in their assessment of informed
consent and decisional capacity in the context of medical decision-making more generally.
Concerns about decisional capacity and vulnerability arise in all end-of-life medical decision-
making. Logically speaking, there is no reason to think that the injured, ill, and disabled who have
the option to refuse or to request withdrawal of lifesaving or life-sustaining treatment, or who seek
palliative sedation, are less vulnerable or less susceptible to biased decision-making than those
who might seek more active assistance in dying. […]
[116] As the trial judge noted, the individual assessment of vulnerability (whatever its source) is
implicitly condoned for life-and-death decision-making in Canada. In some cases, these decisions
are governed by advance directives, or made by a substitute decision-maker. Canada does not
argue that the risk in those circumstances requires an absolute prohibition (indeed, there is
currently no federal regulation of such practices). In A.C., Abella J. adverted to the potential
vulnerability of adolescents who are faced with life-and-death decisions about medical treatment
(paras. 72-78). Yet, this Court implicitly accepted the viability of an individual assessment of
decisional capacity in the context of that case. We accept the trial judge’s conclusion that it is
possible for physicians, with due care and attention to the seriousness of the decision involved, to
adequately assess decisional capacity. [emphasis added]
32. In 2016, after the Carter judgment and before the adoption of C-14, the Court of Appeal of
Alberta granted access to MAID to a person suffering solely from a mental illness. In Canada
(Attorney General) v. E.F., that Court stated:
[59] As can be seen, in Carter 2015 the issue of whether psychiatric conditions should be excluded
from the declaration of invalidity was squarely before the court; nevertheless the court declined to
make such an express exclusion as part of its carefully crafted criteria. Our task, and that of the
motions judge, is not to re-litigate those issues, but to apply the criteria set out by the Supreme
Court to the individual circumstances of the applicant. The criteria in paragraph 127 and the
safeguards built into them are the result of the court’s careful balancing of important societal
interests with a view to the Charter protections we all enjoy. Persons with a psychiatric illness are
not explicitly or inferentially excluded if they fit the criteria.
33. In Truchon (2019), the Quebec Superior Court stated:
[466] From the evidence as a whole, the Court concludes as follows:
1. Medical assistance in dying as practised in Canada is a strict and rigorous process that, in itself,
displays no obvious weakness;
2. The physicians involved are able to assess the patients’ capacity to consent and identify signs of
ambivalence, mental disorders affecting or likely to affect the decision-making process, or cases of
coercion or abuse;
3. The vulnerability of a person requesting medical assistance in dying must be assessed
exclusively on a case-by-case basis, according to the characteristics of the person and not based
on a reference group of so-called “vulnerable persons”. Beyond the various factors of vulnerability
that physicians are able to objectify or identify, the patient’s ability to understand and to consent is
ultimately the decisive factor, in addition to the other legal criteria;
4. The physicians involved are able to distinguish a suicidal patient from a patient seeking medical
assistance in dying. Moreover, there are important distinctions between suicide and medical
assistance in dying with respect to both the characteristics of the people involved and the reasons
that motivate them;
5. Neither the national data in Canada or Quebec nor the foreign data indicate any abuse, slippery
slope, or even heightened risks for vulnerable people when imminent end of life is not an eligibility
criterion for medical assistance in dying.
34. In Ontario (Attorney General) v. G (2020), the Supreme Court of Canada dealt with a law that
provided a person convicted of a sexual offence with the possibility of being removed from the sex
offender registry, while denying any similar option to all individuals found not criminally responsible
on account of mental disorder (NCRMD). The Court found that section 15 of the Charter, the
equality guarantee, requires that these individuals must also have access to an exclusion
mechanism, based on individualized assessments. The Court concluded that a blanket denial of
potential exclusion for that group was unconstitutional. For the majority, Justice Karakatsanis
wrote:
[74] I agree with the Court of Appeal that Christopher’s Law is not minimally impairing of the s. 15(1)
rights of those who were found NCRMD of a sexual offence and discharged. Christopher’s Law itself
includes mechanisms by which, after some form of individualized assessment of their
circumstances, offenders who were not found NCRMD can be removed from the registry (free
pardon), relieved of the obligation to report (free pardon and record suspension), or exempted from
reporting in the first place (discharge under s. 730 of the Criminal Code). The inclusion of any
method of exempting and removing those found NCRMD from the registry based on individualized
assessment would be less impairing of their s. 15(1) rights and could actually increase the registry’s
effectiveness by narrowing its application to individuals who pose a greater risk to the community.
[emphasis added]
35. With respect for those who hold a different opinion on the state of the law, I prefer the one
expressed by the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association in a brief on Bill C-7 filed with the
Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs on December 1, 2020, when
stating:
Mental illness should not be excluded from the definition of “serious and incurable illness, disease
or disability” … [in the Criminal Code].
This absolute prohibition does not comply with the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in Carter v.
Canada (Attorney General), 2015 SCC 5 […], and is therefore unconstitutional. Excluding all
“mentally ill” people from choosing assistance in dying, no matter how extreme their suffering, no
matter how grievous and irremediable their condition, and irrespective of the competence and
voluntariness of their decision, takes away a human right that was granted by the Supreme Court of
Canada. In sum, the government should support human rights in mental health care – not
stigmatize and abandon those suffering from mental health issues.
36. In conclusion, the majority recommendation to exclude eligibility for MAID for an indeterminate
but assuredly long period for all individuals suffering solely from an irremediable mental illness,
irrespective of their competence and voluntariness, the uncurable nature of their mental illness
and no matter how extreme their suffering, contravenes section 7 of the Charter because it is
excessive, and thus overbroad. In addition, this group exclusion contravenes section 15 by
disallowing access that must rest in all other cases on individualized assessment of compliance
with all requirements of the Criminal Code.
RECOMMENDATION: A REFERENCE TO THE SUPREME COURT OF CANADA
37. Parliament is constitutionally entitled to require certain processes, such as the requirement for
two or more doctors’ opinions and other safeguards, to determine MAID access for individuals to
protect them, if reasonable in the circumstances.
38. However, it is likely unconstitutional for Parliament to exclude all members of a group, including
those meeting all the applicable requirements, including valid free consent, rather than to provide
for a process to conduct individual assessment of a person’s eligibility to access MAID.
39. If Parliament nevertheless decides to implement the majority recommendation, the message
sent to those affected by the new and indeterminate – but assuredly long – exclusion will be to
resort to a constitutional challenge before the courts, forums where evidence can be objectively
assessed in light of sections 7 and 15 of the Charter.
40. But unfortunately, such a constitutional challenge is a long, complex, and expensive process.
The Carter challenge lasted for four years even if the trial was held on an expedited basis.
41. In the meantime, the recommended exclusion will cause some capable individuals meeting all
the applicable stringent requirements to endure extreme suffering or to commit suicide.
42. Thus, should Parliament decide to extend the exclusion from MAID access for persons with a
mental illness as a sole underlying condition, I recommend that the Government submit a
reference question to the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the constitutionality of such an
extension as soon as possible.
1. The poll indicated that 82 percent of Canadians agree that with the appropriate safeguards in
place, such an adult with the capacity to provide informed consent should be able to seek an
assessment for MAID.
The Liberal Government Must Abandon MAID for Mental Disorders
Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying: Conservative Supplemental Opinion
This Supplemental Report reflects the views of the Conservatives who serve on the Special Joint
Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (the “Committee”): The Honourable Yonah Martin
(Senator, British Columbia), Shelby Kramp-Neuman, M.P. (Hastings—Lennox and Addington),
Michael Cooper
M.P. (St. Albert—Edmonton), The Honourable Ed Fast, P.C., M.P. (Abbotsford).
Introduction
The evidence is clear. Canada is not ready for the expansion of MAID in cases where a mental
disorder is the sole underlying medical condition (MAID MD-SUMC). Accordingly, Conservatives
endorse the Committee’s recommendation that the government should not proceed with MAID
MD-SUMC. However, for clarity, Conservatives call on the Liberal government to forthwith introduce
legislation to put an indefinite pause on MAID MD-SUMC. Based on the balance of evidence, MAID
MD-SUMC cannot be safely implemented.
There are serious problems with MAID MD-SUMC, on which we wish to elaborate. Chief among
these is the fact that: (1) it is difficult, if not impossible, to determine the irremediability of a mental
disorder in individual cases; and (2) it is difficult for a clinician to distinguish between a “rational”
request for MAID MD-SUMC and one motivated by suicidal ideation. So long as these issues remain
unresolved, it is impossible to safely implement MAID MD-SUMC. There are other problems that
demonstrate a lack of preparedness, including inadequate training materials and practice
standards, and a lack of consensus amongst medical professionals. These and other issues are
discussed in this Supplemental Report.
At the outset, we wish to highlight the incompetent approach that the Liberal government has taken
with respect to MAID MD-SUMC. It has been nothing short of shambolic. This is underscored by the
recommendation in the main report, supported by all recognized parties in the House of Commons,
calling on the Liberal government not to proceed. It should never have come to this. This is a
consequence of a government that put blind ideology ahead of evidence-based decision making.
We find ourselves, for the second time, approaching a deadline for the implementation of MAID
MD- SUMC unprepared. We are here because former Justice Minister David Lametti accepted a
radical, eleventh-hour Senate amendment to set in motion the expansion of MAID to cases where a
mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition. This was done absent sufficient study and
consultation on what amounts to a significant expansion of MAID, impacting some of the most
vulnerable persons in Canadian society. Had adequate study taken place before this decision was
made, no responsible government would have moved ahead with MAID MD-SUMC.
Irremediability
Over the past year, no meaningful progress has been made towards resolving the fundamental
issue of accurately determining irremediability in the context of MAID MD-SUMC. While this
remains unresolved, it would be reckless and dangerous for the Liberal government to proceed with
MAID MD- SUMC for at least two reasons. First, such an expansion will lead to the premature
deaths of persons with mental disorders who otherwise could have gotten better. Second, the
difficulty in determining irremediability casts doubt on whether MAID MD-SUMC can be
implemented in accordance with the law. That is because a prerequisite to qualifying for MAID is
that a person must suffer from a “grievous and irremediable” medical condition.
Irremediability is defined in section 241.2(1) of the Criminal Code, as a medical condition that is
“incurable” and in “an advanced state of irreversible decline.”1 In other words, to qualify, a MAID
assessor must be satisfied that the person’s condition will not get better.
The May 2022 report of the government’s Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness (the “Expert
Panel”) acknowledged the difficulty in determining the irremediability of a mental disorder:
“The evolution of many mental disorders, like some other chronic conditions, is difficult to predict
for a given individual. There is limited knowledge about the long-term prognosis for many
conditions, and it is difficult, if not impossible, for clinicians to make accurate predictions about the
future for an individual patient.”2 [emphasis added]
The challenges with respect to determining irremediability was among the reasons cited in a
December 2022 letter signed by the Association of Chairs of Psychiatry in Canada, which includes
the heads of psychiatry departments at all 17 medical schools, calling on the government to delay
implementation of MAID MD-SUMC.3 Following this letter, the Liberals introduced Bill C-39 to delay
the implementation of MAID MD-SUMC for one year, from March 2023 to March 2024.
The evidence before the Committee demonstrates that no progress has been made with respect to
determining irremediability. When Dr. Mona Gupta, Chair of the Expert Panel, was asked whether
anything had changed since the May 2022 Expert Panel report concluded that it is “difficult, if not
impossible” to predict irremediability, she answered: “No, that hasn’t changed since May 2022.”4
Other psychiatrists who appeared before the Committee also agreed that nothing has changed. For
example, when Dr. Jitender Sareen, Chair of the Department of Psychiatry at the University of
Manitoba, was asked whether we are any closer to reliably determining irremediability compared to
a year ago, he said: “No, we’re not. We haven’t changed from a year ago.”5 Likewise, Dr. Tarek Rajji,
Chair of the Medical Advisory Committee at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH),
said: “There’s no scientific evidence on it. We still cannot, at this time, determine at the individual
level whether the person has an irremediable illness or not.”6 Dr. Sonu Gaind, Chief of the
Department of Psychiatry at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre in Toronto, noted: “worldwide
evidence shows we cannot predict irremediability in cases of mental illness.”7
The Committee was warned by several leading psychiatrists that this difficulty means that MAID
MD- SUMC cannot be implemented safely. MAID decisions in the case of a mental disorder will be
based on “hunches and guesswork that could be wildly inaccurate.”8 According to Dr. Gaind,
evidence shows “predictions [on irremediability] are wrong over half the time.”9 [emphasis added]
As such, Dr. Gaind asserted that this “means that [MAID providers] would be providing death under
false pretenses.”10
The inappropriateness of moving forward with MAID MD-SUMC, having regard for this level of
uncertainty, is underscored by evidence that persons suffering with a mental disorder often can
recover “with appropriate evidence-based treatments.”11 According to Dr. Sareen:
“Unlike physical conditions that drive MAID requests, we do not understand the biological basis of
mental disorders and addictions, but we know that they can resolve over time.”12
Mental disorders are different than diseases such as terminal cancer for which Canadians can
access MAID. Unlike cancer, it is difficult, if not impossible to be certain of the prospective course
of any individual case involving a sole underlying mental disorder.13
While the Expert Panel report acknowledged the difficulty of determining irremediability, it
recommended that assessments could be appropriately done on a “case-by-case basis,” absent
objective criteria. The Expert Panel recommended that “the requester and assessors must come to
a shared understanding that the person has a serious and incurable illness,” including having regard
for past treatment attempts.14
We submit that this approach is cavalier, inadequate, and will result in the premature deaths of
persons who could get better. It faultily assumes that because a person has not yet found relief
from a mental disorder, that he or she cannot find relief. Relying on an agreement of an assessor
and a requestor on a “case-by-case basis” is especially reckless in the face of a paucity of evidence
that the person suffering will not get better.
Dr. Sareen, speaking on behalf of eight chairs of psychiatry at medical schools across Canada,
“strongly recommend[ed] an extended pause on expanding MAID to include mental disorders as
the sole underlying medical condition in Canada.” As Dr. Sareen succinctly put it: “We’re simply not
ready.” This assessment was shared by other leading psychiatrists who appeared before the
Committee.15
Conservatives agree. Considering that Canada’s MAID provisions are intended to be reserved for
those who cannot get better, MAID MD-SUMC cannot appropriately move forward before the
fundamental issue of irremediability is resolved. Moreover, it would be legally incoherent, having
regard for the prerequisite of suffering from a disease or illness that is irremediable to qualify for
MAID.
Suicidality
The balance of evidence demonstrates difficulty on the part of clinicians in distinguishing a
“rational” MAID MD-SUMC request from one motivated by suicidal ideation. This is underscored by
the fact that approximately 90% of those who commit suicide have a diagnosable mental disorder.
16 This difficulty is clinically and socially problematic. So long as this difficulty is present, the line
between suicide prevention and suicide assistance will be blurred.17
Dr. Gaind explained:
“Scientific evidence shows we cannot distinguish suicidality caused by mental illness from
motivations leading to psychiatric MAID requests, with overlapping characteristics suggesting there
may be no distinction to make.”18
Dr. Sareen, when asked how psychiatrists are trained to separate suicidal ideation from psychiatric
MAID requests, said:
“[T]here is no clear operational definition differentiating between when someone is asking for MAID
and when someone is asking for suicide when they're not dying. Internationally, this is the
differentiation. If somebody is dying, then it can be considered MAID. When they're not dying, it is
considered suicide. It's very difficult, and there's no operational definition on it.”19
In a similar vein, Dr. Rajji noted:
“There is no clear way to separate suicidal ideation or a suicide plan from requests for MAID.
Therefore, there needs to be some discussion to see a consensus and agreement, as professionals,
on what part of an individual's history with a particular illness would constitute that separation. It's
not simple.”20
Dr. Sareen cautioned that MAID MD-SUMC will facilitate unnecessary deaths and undermine
suicide prevention efforts.21 He also highlighted the phenomenon of MAID-related suicide
contagion saying:
“When a society makes MAID available, the population believes it is a way to end suffering. In other
jurisdictions that have had MAID available for mental disorders, not only are there deaths due to
MAID, but there are also deaths related to non-MAID suicides. I just want to emphasize that it's not
a suicide prevention mechanism... We're actually going to make not only suicide deaths go up, but
also MAID deaths go up.”22
Having regard for the foregoing, Conservatives abhor the inevitability that MAID MD-SUMC will lead
to state-facilitated suicide. The Expert Panel flippantly dismissed this serious concern, stating:
“In allowing MAiD in [MD-SUMC] cases, society is making an ethical choice to enable certain
people to receive MAiD on a case-by-case basis regardless of whether MAiD and suicide are
considered to be distinct or not.”23
Without more, this reasoning is morally perverse and out of step with the ethical mores of most
Canadians. Most Canadians do not wish to see suicide made easier or facilitated by the state as a
solution to psychological suffering.24 Conservatives believe that persons who are suffering from
mental health issues deserve help and hope, not state-facilitated suicide. MAID MD-SUMC will
inhibit the former while guaranteeing the latter. In the face of this, we submit that moving ahead
with MAID MD- SUMC is wrong-headed and profoundly unwise.
Inadequate Practice Standards and Training Resources
Proponents of implementing MAID MD-SUMC point to the development of training resources and
practice standards as demonstrating readiness. More specifically, they point to a curriculum
developed by the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and Providers (CAMAP), as well as the
Model Practice Standard (MPS) developed by the Liberal-government-appointed Task Group.
Conservatives disagree. Neither the development of the CAMAP curriculum nor the MPS are
satisfactory. They both fail to address the fundamental issues of irremediability and suicidality,
which for the reasons explained above, are a prerequisite to readiness.
Committee witnesses Julie Campbell, who appeared on behalf of CAMAP, and Dr. Gordon Gubitz,
who appeared on behalf of Nova Scotia Health, were unable to identify any specific criteria in the
CAMAP curriculum to aid clinicians in determining irremediability.25 Without more, the absence of
criteria on a question as significant as irremediability represents a complete failure on the part of
CAMAP to properly prepare clinicians for MAID MD-SUMC.
Consistent with this, Dr. Gaind characterized the curriculum as “wholly inadequate.”26 Specific to
suicidality, Dr. Gaind expressed shock, stating that the curriculum “consists of 10 pages of which 5
slides have content and a four-and-a-half-minute audio clip.”27 He described the training as
“dangerous,” because it would lead assessors to believe they can separate suicidality from a
psychiatric MAID request absent evidence to support that.28
Similar problems exist with the MPS. The MPS offers no guidelines on determining irremediability
nor on distinguishing suicidality from a psychiatric MAID request.
We are also alarmed by the expansive definition of “mental disorder” provided for in the MPS. It
states that anything listed in the DSM5-TR could be considered a mental disorder for the purposes
of accessing MAID.29 The DSM5-TR lists a wide range of disorders and conditions, including
depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, and personality disorders, among others.30 Though the Liberal
government’s Legislative Backgrounder on Bill C-7 states that “mental illness” for the purpose of
MAID generally refers “to those conditions which are primarily within the domain of psychiatry,”31
there are no legislative safeguards to guarantee protections for those who suffer from mental
disorders that are typically treated by specialties outside of psychiatry, such as autism spectrum
disorders. Multiple witnesses confirmed that this expansive definition could even render persons
suffering from a substance abuse disorder eligible for MAID MD-SUMC.32
This radically expansive eligibility illustrates how far Canada is falling down a forewarned, but too
often ignored, “slippery slope.” If implemented, the scope of MAID would fundamentally change to
something resembling state-sanctioned, state-facilitated suicide, undermining human dignity and
the sanctity of life.
Putting aside our substantive concerns with the CAMAP curriculum and the MPS, there are other
issues with the rollout of these materials that speak to a lack of readiness. There has been an
uneven adoption of the MPS across the provinces and territories. We note that Quebec has
amended its MAID law to expressly prohibit MAID MD-SUMC. The CAMAP curriculum has seen a
limited uptake on the part of medical professionals. A miniscule two percent of psychiatrists across
Canada have registered for the CAMAP curriculum33 – a curriculum that was not unveiled until the
fall of 2023.
Committee testimony also highlighted that clinical practice guidelines do not yet exist. Dr. Rajji,
appearing at the Committee on behalf of CMAH, said that CAMH is “hearing loud and clear” from
medical professionals that “more clarity and directions” are needed.34 All of these practical and
logistical shortcomings demonstrate that, regardless of whether there are merits to MAID MD-
SUMC, Canada is not ready for MAID MD-SUMC to come into effect in March 2024.
A Lack of Consensus Amongst Medical Professionals
Our position that MAID MD-SUMC should not be implemented is underscored by a lack of
consensus, and in fact general opposition, on the part of medical professionals. This lack of
consensus, and general opposition, goes beyond the question of readiness effective March 2024. It
also applies to whether MAID MD-SUMC is at all appropriate.
When asked about consensus among psychiatrists, Dr. Alison Freeland, representing the Canadian
Psychiatric Association (CPA), was unable to confirm that a consensus exists.35 Dr. Sareen noted
that “[t]he majority of surveys have shown that the majority of psychiatrists are against MAID for
mental illness.”36
An October 2023 survey of Manitoba psychiatrists found that 49% of psychiatrists in that province
oppose the legislation legalizing MAID MD-SUMC compared to just 33% who support it.37 The
survey also found that an overwhelming 80% of Manitoba psychiatrists believe that Canada is not
ready to implement MAID MD-SUMC.38 An October 2021 survey of the Ontario Medical Association
found that 56% of respondents disagree or strongly disagree that MAID MD-SUMC should be
available, compared to only 28% of respondents who agree or strongly agree.39
These survey results reflect the balance of testimony from non-activist expert witnesses who
appeared before the Committee. We observe that much of the testimony the Committee heard in
favour of implementing MAID MD-SUMC came from individuals with a history of MAID activism, as
well as involvement in developing the MPS and CAMAP curriculum, who unsurprisingly “graded
their own homework” favourably.
This lack of consensus and general opposition should give the government significant pause. We
submit that there must be something approaching a professional consensus before MAID MD-
SUMC can be implemented. After all, MAID MD-SUMC involves life-and-death decisions and will
impact some of the most vulnerable persons in Canadian society. Anything less than overwhelming
support from medical professionals casts serious doubt on the appropriateness of the concept of
MAID MD-SUMC, let alone a question of readiness.
Additional Considerations
MAID MD-SUMC is not Constitutionally Required, it is a Political Decision
The implementation of MAID MD-SUMC is a political decision on the part of the Liberal government.
Some proponents of MAID MD-SUMC have attempted to “muddy the waters” by claiming that MAID
MD-SUMC is constitutionally required. For instance, prominent MAID activist, Professor Jocelyn
Downie, at Committee, cited the Supreme Court of Canada’s Carter decision, as well as the Alberta
Court of Appeal’s EF decision, as supporting this assertion.40 Former Justice Minister David
Lametti claimed to be compelled by the courts as he attempted to justify this expansion.
Respectfully, this assertion is without merit. Our view is supported by the analysis of 28 law
professors who signed a letter stating that MAID MD-SUMC is not constitutionally required.41
The law professors noted that in Carter, the Supreme Court explicitly stated that MAID in cases of
psychiatric disorders would “not fall within the parameters” of the decision.42 The parameters of
Carter are limited to the narrow facts of that case. Accordingly, as the professors observe: “Our
Supreme Court has never confirmed that there is a broad constitutional right to obtain help with
suicide via health-care provider ending-of-life.”
In EF, the Alberta Court of Appeal interpreted Carter as not excluding mental illness. However, EF
was decided before the passage of Bill C-14, the effect of which was to prohibit MAID MD-SUMC.
Moreover, the Alberta Court of Appeal qualified its ruling by stating: “Issues that might arise
regarding the interpretation and constitutionality of eventual legislation should obviously wait until
the legislation has been enacted.”43 The decision was not appealed to the Supreme Court, and no
other court has pronounced on the matter.
In short, there is no binding precedent with respect to MAID MD-SUMC. Any future court precedent
is purely speculative. We do not believe it is prudent to implement MAID MD-SUMC based on such
speculative opinion, especially in the face of significant clinical and ethical challenges surrounding
MAID MD-SUMC.
Unsupported Claims of Likely Limited Uptake for MAID MD-SUMC
Several witnesses attempted to minimize concerns regarding the impact of MAID MD-SUMC on
vulnerable Canadians, claiming, without evidence, that only a minute segment of the population
would qualify.44 MAID practitioner, Dr. Stephanie Green, boldly claimed that the annual uptake
could be as little as “in the teens.”45
We have no confidence that this expansion would be so limited. It was noted that the uptake has
been relatively small in the Benelux countries.46 In fact, in the Netherlands, only approximately 5%
to 10% of MAID MD-SUMC requests are granted.47
We submit that the Benelux countries are a poor comparator, because in those countries, patients
by law must exhaust all treatment options to qualify for MAID MD-SUMC. There is no such
safeguard in Canada, and shockingly, the Expert Panel recommended against any additional
legislative safeguards. Absent Benelux-style safeguards, there is every reason to expect that the
uptake will be considerably higher in Canada.
We further note that Canada arguably already has the most permissive MAID regime in the world.
Consistent with that, even without this expansion, there has been a significant increase in MAID
cases in Canada since Bill C-14 became law in 2016. The latest data show that there were 13,241
MAID deaths in Canada in 2022, which amounts to 4.1% of all deaths. 48 This represents a sizable
31% increase from 2021 and a staggering 1,216% increase from the first year MAID was
available.49 By contrast, in California, which requires the self-administration of the drugs used to
end a person’s life, there were only 853 MAID deaths in 2022.50 We cite California as a comparator
because it is a jurisdiction with a similar population to Canada and one which legalized MAID at
around the same time (2016). These numbers are in themselves concerning and lend no
confidence to the claim that there will be limited uptake of MAID MD-SUMC.
Inadequate Consultation with Indigenous Peoples
The political decision by the Liberal government to expand MAID MD-SUMC was made without any
meaningful consultation with Indigenous peoples. Based on the testimony of Jocelyne Voisin of
Health Canada, it is apparent that consultation has only commenced recently. According to Ms.
Voisin, the results of this consultation will be published in a “What We Heard” report in 2025 – one
year after the scheduled expansion of MAID MD-SUMC.51
This lack of consultation is unacceptable, especially in the face of unique vulnerabilities and health
needs faced by Indigenous communities.52 It underscores the lack of readiness for the
implementation of MAID MD-SUMC.
Hundreds of Briefs Overlooked
There was a high level of public engagement on this study. Close to 900 briefs were submitted to the
Clerk of the Committee. Constrained resources did not allow these briefs to be translated in
sufficient time to be considered as evidence for the Committee’s report. This is a profoundly
disappointing failure and unacceptable for a G7 Parliament.
As a result, important voices, including from vulnerable Canadians who might be impacted by MAID
MD-SUMC, were denied their voice. We anticipate that the balance of evidence in the briefs would
have further supported our position that the government should not proceed with MAID MD-SUMC.
Conclusion
The fundamental problems around accurately determining irremediability and suicidality in the
context of MAID MD-SUMC are as present today as they were a year ago. Until these issues are
resolved, MAID MD-SUMC cannot be safely implemented. Accordingly, it would be reckless and
dangerous for the Liberal government to allow MAID MD-SUMC to go forward in March 2024.
There is no reason to believe that these fundamental problems will be resolved in the foreseeable
future. As such, another arbitrary deadline extending the sunset clause, while better than
proceeding as planned, is not the path forward.
Rather, the Liberal government must immediately introduce legislation to amend the Criminal Code
to provide that a mental disorder is not a medical condition for which a person could receive MAID.
In other words, the Liberal government must permanently abandon this expansion of MAID. Failing
to do so will inevitably lead to the premature deaths of vulnerable Canadians who could have
gotten better. Such an outcome is unacceptable, and preventable, but only if the Liberal
government acts. We urge them to do so, before it is too late.
Respectfully submitted,
The Honourable Yonah Martin, Senator British Columbia
Shelby Kramp-Neuman, M.P. Hastings—Lennox and Addington
Michael Cooper, M.P.
St. Albert—Edmonton
The Honorable Ed Fast, P.C., M.P. Abbotsford
1. Criminal Code of Canada (R.S.C. 1985, c.C-46), s.241.2(2).
2. Health Canada, Final Report of the Expert Panel on MAiD and Mental Illness, p.9.
3. Baines, Camille. “Canada should delay MAID for people with mental disorders: psychiatrists”
CTV News, December 1, 2022
4. Evidence: November 7, 2023 (Dr. Mona Gupta).
5. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Jitender Sareen).
6. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Tarek Rajji).
7. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Sonu Gaind).
8. Evidence; May 26, 2022 (Dr. Mark Sinyor).
9. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Sonu Gaind); Nicolini ME, Jardas EJ, Zarate CA, Gastmans C,
Kim SYH. Irremediability in psychiatric euthanasia: examining the objective standard. Psychological
Medicine. 2023;53(12):5729-5747. doi:10.1017/S0033291722002951
10. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Sonu Gaind).
11. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Jitender Sareen).
12. Ibid.
13. Evidence: May 26, 2022 (Dr. John Maher).
14. Health Canada, Final Report of the Expert Panel on MAiD and Mental Illness, p.12-13.
15. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Jitender Sareen); Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Sonu
Gaind).
16. Evidence: May 25, 2022 (Dr. Brian Mishara); Evidence: May 26, 2022 (Dr. Georgia Vrakas);
Council of Canadian Academies, The State of Knowledge on Medical Assistance in Dying Where a
Mental Disorder Is the Sole Underlying Medical Condition, pp. 42 and 169.
17. Evidence: May 26, 2022 (Dr. John Maher); Evidence: May 25, 2022 (Dr. Brian Mishara).
18. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Sonu Gaind).
19. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Jitender Sareen).
20. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Tarek Rajji).
21. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Jitender Sareen).
22. Ibid.
23. Health Canada, Final Report of the Expert Panel on MAiD and Mental Illness, p.66.
24. Angus Reid Institute, Mental Health and MAID: Canadians who struggle to get help more likely to
support expanding eligibility, September 28, 2023.
25. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Ms. Julie Campbell); Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Gordon
Gubitz).
26. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Sonu Gaind).
27. Ibid.
28. Ibid.
29. Health Canada, Model Practice Standard for Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID), March 2023,
p.23.
30. American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.).
31. Legislative Background Bill C-7: Government of Canada’s Legislative Response to the Superior
Court of Québec Truchon Decision.
32. Evidence: November 7, 2023 (Dr. Mona Gupta); Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Gordon
Gubitz).
33. Evidence: November 7, 2023 (Dr. Alison Freeland).
34. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Tarek Rajji).
35. Evidence: November 7, 2023 (Dr. Alison Freeland).
36. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Jitender Sareen).
37. University of Manitoba, Medical Assistance in Dying for Mental Disorders: A Survey of University
of Manitoba Faculty and Residents, January 2023.
38. Ibid.
39. Ontario Medical Association, MAID Survey of OMA Section on Psychiatry Members, October
2021.
40. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Jocelyn Downie).
41. Dr. Trudeau Lemmens et al., Parliament is not forced by the courts to legalize MAID for mental
illness: Law Professor’s Letter to Cabinet, February 2, 2023.
42.Ibid; Carter v. Canada, 2015 SCC, para 111.
43. Ibid; Canada (Attorney General) v E.F., 2016 ABCA 155, para 72.
44. Evidence: November 7, 2023 (Dr. Mona Gupta); Evidence: November 7, 2023 (Dr. Alison
Freeland).
45. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Dr. Stefanie Green).
46. Evidence: November 7, 2023 (Senator Dr. Stan Kutcher).
47. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Dr. Sonu Gaind).
48. Health Canada, Fourth Annual Report on Medical Assistance in Dying 2022, p.5.
49. Health Canada, First Annual Report on Medical Assistance in Dying 2019, p.18.
50. California Department of Public Health, California End of Life Option Act 2022 Data Report, July
2023, p.3.
51. Evidence: November 21, 2023 (Ms. Joycelyn Voisin).
52. Evidence: November 28, 2023 (Professor Archibald Kaiser).
BLOC QUÉBÉCOIS SUPPLEMENTARY OPINION LUC THÉRIAULT, MEMBER FOR MONTCALM
This report is intended to be complementary, but I would like to raise certain questions about the
wording of the final recommendation and reservations about the methodology and organization of
our work in order to fulfill our task (e.g. sitting and deliberating by extended deadlines) since them
beginning of the work of the Joint Special Committee (JSC) on the MA. I would like to pay tribute to
the staff of the Library of Parliament for the commitment they have shown and the work they have
accomplished during the course of this study, and above all I would like to thank all the witnesses
who have participated in this study in whatever way, by giving evidence and/or sending a brief.
The source of the problem
1- We deplore the fact that, since the Carter decision1 , the federal government has been dragging
its feet when it comes to MA, forcing parliamentarians to work in a hurry to meet often unrealistic
deadlines in conditions that are far from optimal from both a methodological and work organization
standpoint. Our latest meeting is a clear example of this.
From extension to extension
2- Extending a deadline without changing the organization of the work once the deadline has been
obtained, which was initially unstable due to the lack of time, merely perpetuates an unstable
extension of the work. Just think of the requests for extensions of time since the CARTER RULING.
On the other hand, throughout the work of the Joint Special Committee, we need only list all the
times when, in the closing remarks of a panel or session, the committee chairmen, addressing the
witnesses, apologized for the short time we had devoted to them. For example, receiving three
specialists in the same hour and giving them just 5 minutes of presentation time, without having
received their briefs in advance (sometimes because they had been called in at the last minute, or
because there wasn't enough time for translation), in order to better prepare the exchanges. Or
placing three expert panellists per hour, some of whom will barely be questioned because the
witness is of no interest to the other parties... This is far from optimal. We should have drawn
inspiration from the exemplary methodology used by ASSNAT (Quebec's National Assembly) in its
work on MA.
3- The other source of the problem is that, unlike ASSNAT, the Canadian Parliament will never see a
consensual or transparent approach to the organization of work, because the Conservatives are
incapable of being non-partisan when it comes to MA. Any means are good enough to put obstacles
in the way.
4- While Ottawa was incapable of proactivity and a transparent approach, in 2012 the Quebec
National Assembly (ASSNAT) began transparent work and consultations that would lead three years
later to the first "law concerning end-of-life care2 ". As for the Canadian government and the House
of Commons, they refused to be proactive on the subject of MAID, rejecting Francine Lalonde's
bills, for example, and failing to introduce any government legislation on the subject.
5- In fact, when it comes to MAID, it was the Supreme Court that forced the House of Commons in
2015 to amend the Criminal Code in response to patients' demands that their constitutional rights
be violated.
6- As for our recent work in connection with recommendation 13 of the report of the Joint Special
Committee (JSC) on the MAID tabled in February 2023 3, it is clear that the government's reluctance
to reconstitute the committee at the end of September, so that the JSC could sit at the beginning of
October, will have had the effect of limiting the timetable of work sessions and adopting a more
appropriate methodology. It is regrettable that we did not have access to the briefs of the main
expert witnesses directly related to the specific mandate under study, nor did we have access to
the additional information requested to establish the relevance of certain testimonies.
On the substance: the need to open medical aid in dying (MAID) to MD-SUMC
7- The Bloc Québécois is of the opinion that the Carter decision and the Beaudoin ruling4 justify
opening up MAID to people with MD-SUMC whose chronic suffering has become intolerable.
8- The courts (Carter decision, Beaudoin ruling) have established that, on the merits, an absolute
ban on MAID for people with a mental disorder as their only claimed medical problem (MD-SUMC)
would be discriminatory and unjustified. Why should the State infringe or restrict the right to self-
determination of a person with a MD when his or her decision-making capacity is not affected?
9- The role of the State is not to pretend (in a matter as intimate as one's own death) to know better
than the person facing intolerable suffering what is best for him or her (beneficence). The role of the
State is to ensure the conditions for the exercise of a free and enlightened choice on the part of the
individual.
10- Law and clinical ethics have already recognized the patient's right to self-determination. Free
and informed consent, an informed decision, the exercise of the patient's decision-making capacity
when it has been properly established according to the rules of the art, is opposed to medical
paternalism. Thus, bioethics literature explains that we have moved on from the notion of
therapeutic obstinacy to the recognition of the right to die. From that point onwards, curative
relentlessness motivated by medical paternalism had to make way for the patient's will and right to
avail himself of palliative care, comfort care and, later, MAID. On the other hand, this respect for the
suffering patient's autonomy and right to self-determination has led, in clinical practice and in law,
to the recognition of the refusal of vital treatment and the cessation of treatment as elements of
good medical practice.
11- Why should it be any different for certain patients with a mental disorder whose suffering has
become intolerable and whose chronicity has been established over time, and whose medical
records show beyond doubt that all available treatments have been given without any permanent
improvement or significant alleviation of the suffering that has become intolerable?
Applying does not mean being eligible
12- The Report of the expert group5 which suggested the conditions under which MAID could be
extended to MD-SUMC are clear. Just because a patient applies does not mean he or she is eligible.
13- According to Stephanie Green6 , a person is ineligible:
a) In suicidal crisis
b) Newly treated and diagnosed
c) Demand based on structural vulnerabilities
d) Refuses without justification all treatments that could improve his condition
e) If there are accessible and effective treatments
f) If the assessors are unable to give an opinion on all or some of the criteria
14- Recognizing that irremediability and incurability are not always as easy to establish for MD as
for Track 1 illnesses (although the intensity of suffering may be similar), and that suicidal ideations
must be distinguished from a thoughtful and constant desire for MAID, the Collège des médecins
du Québec has drawn up guidelines, five conditions to avoid any drift7 :
a) Firstly, the decision to grant medical aid in dying in a case of mental disorder must not be part of
a single episode of care, but must be based on a comprehensive and fair assessment of the
patient's situation.
b) Secondly, there must be no suicidal ideation, as in a case of major depressive disorder.
c) Thirdly, intense and continuous psychological suffering, confirmed by severe symptoms and
impairment of overall functioning, is present over a long period and deprives the patient of any hope
of relief from the severity of his or her situation. It prevents them from realizing a life project, and
makes their existence meaningless.
d) Fourthly, there must be a long course of care, with appropriate follow-up, multiple trials of
available therapies recognized as effective, and sustained, proven psychosocial support.
e) Fifth, a multidisciplinary assessment of the request must have been carried out in the essential
presence of the physician or specialized mental health nurse- practitioner who followed the
person, and a psychiatrist consulted in the specific context of the request for medical assistance in
dying.
15- The CMQ concludes:
a) We believe that, if these guidelines were respected, people suffering from a serious and
irreversible mental health disorder could also benefit from medical assistance in dying. We must
avoid a situation where people who do not have access to appropriate care, who do not find the
services offered acceptable - for example, prolonged accommodation with no prospect of regaining
greater autonomy - opt, in desperation, for medical aid in dying.
Preparedness for safe and effective application
16- Evidence of de facto accessibility linked to a uniform degree of preparedness across Canada for
safe and adequate application of MAID for MD-SUMC has not been demonstrated, because the JSC
(Joint Special Committee) did not hear from all regulatory authorities from coast to coast. However,
we cannot ignore the fact that Quebec has decided not to go ahead with MAID for MD-SUMC and
that the Collège des médecins, while in favour of MAID for MD-SUMC, clearly indicated in response
to Senator Mégie's questions that it was still at the conversation stage, and that there was still work
to be done in Quebec, while reaffirming that it would be desirable "one day" for MAID for MD-SUMC
to be accessible to patients 8 .
Resistance in care settings and patient suffering
17- Psychiatrists are divided on the question of MAID for MD-SUMC, practically into two groups,
mainly on the question of irremediability and irreversibility. Patients cannot be left to grapple with
the potential consequences of this field resistance. For example, let's not forget the lessons of the
Morgentaler ruling9 , the Badgley and Powel reports on provincial and institutional limitations on
access to exculpatory measures, which became illusory in practice, and the harm this could cause
patients. The Committee did not have the opportunity to explore the concrete clinical and practical
consequences that its resistance would have on patients.
a) It has to be said that the «social consensus » that may or may not be necessary to move forward
is clearly not there when compared to degenerative neurocognitive problems (dementia,
Alzheimer's...).
b)In both medical circles and the general public, there is a consensus in favor of for advance
requests for degenerative cognitive diseases.
c)Yet to date, the government has given no indication that it intends to table a bill by the end of this
legislation to go ahead with early applications, despite the fact that Quebec's ASSNAT has just
passed a law and that from coast to coast there is a broad consensus on the matter, with approval
rates, depending on the poll, ranging from + or - 87 to 60%. This was an important recommendation
in the previous CSM report. Is the government still dragging its feet? Will we have to wait for patients
to commit suicide and end their lives prematurely?
The CSM report
18- So, while the report does indeed reflect what we heard and what was available to us (testimony
at the hearings) to arrive at recommendations, the shaky wording of the final recommendation and
the vagueness it introduces as to the timeframes required to make the MAID available to MD-SUMC
accurately reflect the Committee's inability to decide the issue. However, it remains an inescapable
fact that, while it must be acknowledged that some work has been done, even if the federal
government has had work done upstream, with the establishment of the Task Force on Standards of
Practice in accordance with the recommendation of the Expert Panel, it has not been able to give
the Joint Ad Hoc Committee the time it needs to carry out rigorous, methodologically sound work to
settle the issue, beyond the conviction that the degree of preparation is not uniform across the
country, and that there is still work to be done.
a) The unfortunate consequence of this situation is that in the meantime, in real life, it is likely that
MD patients like SUMC will once again find themselves before the courts to assert their
constitutional rights.
b) Why leave this burden on the shoulders of suffering patients? Why not ask the Supreme Court
right now to clarify and specifically rule on this issue.
19- Reservations regarding the wording of the CSM's sole recommendation
“Whereas the Committee concludes that the medical system in Canada is not prepared for Medical
Assistance in Dying where mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition (hereafter
“MAID MD-SUMC), the committee recommends:
a) The MAID MD-SUMC should not be made available in Canada until the Minister of Health and the
Minister of Justice are satisfied, based on recommendations from their respective departments and
in consultation with their provincial and territorial counterparts and with Indigenous peoples, that it
can be safely and adequately provided; and
b)That one year prior to the date on which it is anticipated that the law will permit MAID MD-SUMC,
pursuant to subparagraph (a), the House of Commons and the Senate re-establish the special Joint
Committee on Medical Assistance In Dying in order to verify the degree of preparedness attained
for a safe and adequate application of MAID MD- SUMC.”
a) There isn't "one health care system"; there are many health care systems in Canada, each under
the responsibility of the territories, the provinces and Quebec.
b) The Criminal Code falls under federal jurisdiction, but health care is provided by Quebec, the
provinces and territories. There's no escaping this reality.
c) It is up to the legislator and the House to decide on the MD-SUMC MAID. However, the wording of
the motion refers this responsibility to the discretionary power of the executive via the Ministers of
Health and Justice and their departmental officials. This makes it unclear, to say the least, whether
the law will be applied by March 17, 2024. What are the time frames involved here?
d) And if, by any chance, the Ministers of Health and Justice (before or after the next election?)
decide that the fruit is suddenly ripe, the special joint committee should be reconstituted at least a
year before the implementation of this decision, to measure the state of preparation of the ground
for a safe and adequate application of the MAID for MD-SUMC. How many years would this mean?
e) The wording of the recommendation testifies to the committee's inability in three working
sessions to make a serious decision on anything other than the fact that we are not in a position to
make a decision or recommend anything to the House. Aside from one conviction, the ground is not
uniformly prepared throughout the territory.
f) In this sense, the Bloc considers that the ground is not ready. The degree of preparation is not the
same from coast to coast. In fact, as far as Quebec is concerned, the testimony of the Collège des
médecins, as the regulatory body responsible for producing not only guidelines in line with the
standards of practice produced by the federal working group, but also guidelines for practice,
clearly indicated that there was still work to be done, and that we were still at the discussion stage,
even if we did hope one day to make MAID possible for MD- SUMC.
1. Carter v. Canada (Attorney General), 2015 SCC 5.
2. Québec, An Act respecting end-of-life care, ch. S-32.0001, 40th legislature, 1st session.
3. Parliament of Canada, Special Joint Committee on Physician-Assisted Dying, Physician-Assisted
Dying in Canada: Choices for Canadians, 1st Session, 44th Parliament, February 2023.
4 .Truchon v. Attorney General of Canada, Attorney General of Canada. 2019, QCCS 3792.
5. Health Canada, Final Report of the Expert Panel on WMA and Mental Illness, 2022.
6. Stephanie Green, Written submission to the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in
Dying (MAID) Regarding our readiness to allow access to MAID for people whose only underlying
medical condition is a mental disorder (MD-SUMC), November 2023.
7. Collège des médecins, Testimony - AMAD-no.40-Parliament of Canada, November 28, 2023.
8, Collège des médecins, Evidence - AMAD (44-1) - no 40 - Parliament of Canada, November 28,
2023.
9. R. v. Morgentaler - SCC Decisions, 1988,1 S.C.R. 30.
