Created: 2024-02-27T19:01:06.891819
Name: Cyclical_Enforcement_Project_2019-2020:_Toys_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/toys-regulations-2019-2020.html
Package ID: ea0874c1-1572-4a45-b01b-ea7db879bd39
Keywords: ['Cyclical Enforcement Project', 'Toys Regulations', 'industry’s compliance', 'specific requirements']
Notes: The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of toys with the specific requirements of the Toys Regulations. 
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Cyclical Enforcement Project 2019-2020: Toys Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Cyclical Enforcement Project 2019-2020: Toys Regulations Fiscal year 2019-2020 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of toys with the specific requirements of the Toys Regulations. For this project, compliance of select toys with the Toys Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors visited establishments and sampled relevant products. Compliance with the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory and by Health Canada inspectors on site for flexible film bags. Prior to initiating this CE project, the CPSP carried out market intelligence to determine the presence of toy companies in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2019-2020 fiscal year, mechanical and chemical testing of 30 different products was carried out. The testing and evaluation resulted in 8 voluntary recalls and 1 stop sale. There were 21 instances where no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Cra-Z-Art Nickelodeon Slime- Mix & Make Sparkling Unicorn Slime Toys R Us No compliance issues detected. None Daiso Toy Police Car Daiso No compliance issues detected. None Danawares So Slime DIY London Drugs No compliance issues detected. None Danawares Corp. So Slime DIY Bubble Slime Scholar's Choice No compliance issues detected. None Dollar Novelties Bulldozer truck Krish Dollar Store No compliance issues detected. None Dollar Tree Turbo Wheels Dollar Tree No compliance issues detected. None Dough Rainbow Glow Dough Ted's Hobby Shop No compliance issues detected. None First Learning Wood Puzzle (farm) Hart No compliance issues detected. None Fun Express SLIME Big Dollar Did not meet the allowable boric acid concentration requirement Voluntary recall by Big Dollar Funny Toys Cartoon dog Magic Dealz Did not meet the small parts requirement Stop Sale by Magic DealzFootnote * heebie jeebies Minilab slime Hobby and Toy Central No compliance issues detected. None Jinzhile Toys City Hero Fire Engines Big Dollar Did not meet the small parts and sharp point requirements Voluntary recall by Bensus Kidwize Aqua Gelz Deluxe playset Groupe Ricochet Inc No compliance issues detected. None Keycraft My First Tractor (Digger Style) Keycraft Amerique Did not meet the sharp point requirement Voluntary recall by Keycraft Amerique MGA Entertainment Poopsie Cutie Tooties Surprise (slime) Party City Did not meet the allowable boric acid concentration requirement Voluntary recall by Party City Mini Cars Construction Vehicule Series Handee Products Did not meet the small parts requirement Voluntary recall by Handee Products Mushimallow MushiMallow Sand Golteez Novelties No compliance issues detected. None Ooze Labs (Thames & Kosmos) Hypercolor Slime Calendar Club + toys & games No compliance issues detected. None Playgo Seaside Crab Shaker Giant Tiger No compliance issues detected. None Orange Tree Toys Flamingo Pull Along Winners No compliance issues detected. None Ready2Robot Ready2Robot- Build Swap, Battle! (Mystery Pilots) Maxi & Cie No compliance issues detected. None Slimygloop Mix'Ems DIY Slime Kit Unicorn Chapters/Indigo No compliance issues detected. None Swimming Animal Wind-up Toy Seabed Park Chantia Sales/Lucky Imports Did not meet the small parts requirement Voluntary recall by Chantia Sales Tooky Toy Mini Bead Maze Your Dollar Store With More No compliance issues detected. None ToyLand Road Master wooden pick up truck Daiso No compliance issues detected. None Toysmith Slime Suckers Granville Island Toy Company Did not meet the allowable boric acid concentration requirement Voluntary recall by Great West Wholesale Unknown Brand DIY Shake Slime Treehouse Toys Did not meet the allowable boric acid concentration requirement Voluntary recall by CLS Sales Inc. Unknown Brand Wooden Squeaky Car CLS Imports No compliance issues detected. None Unknown Brand Fluffy Squishy Lab Slime Piper's Department Store No compliance issues detected. None Your First Friend Your First Friend - Cow CTG Brands No compliance issues detected. None Footnote * Product was not sold to consumers; therefore, a stop sale was sufficient to address the hazard. Return to footnote * referrer Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). Related links Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2021-01-20 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy