Created: 2024-03-18T14:00:29.516568
Name: Real-time_Environmental_Radioactivity_Monitoring_in_Canada
Original URL: https://remap.jrc.ec.europa.eu/Consent/Simple.aspx
Package ID: f0d1c3a9-cf78-4b07-af55-9e8d4303449e
Keywords: ['environmental radioactivity monitoring', 'radiation monitoring', 'background', 'external dose', 'Health', 'Radioactivity', 'Radioactive materials']
Notes: Terrestrial gamma dose rates, reported as ambient dose equivalent in the unit nSv/hr, are presented for the past ninety days to present. Data is measured in real-time, typically from the spectroscopic dosimeters of the Fixed Point Surveillance (FPS) Network. Dosimeter stations of this network are located in population centres and other strategic locations across Canada. Real-time data provides insight into typical levels and fluctuations of radioactivity in the Canadian environment and may provide early detection of sources of radioactivity other than environmental background.  
  
  As a reference, the Nuclear facilities and uranium mines and mills can be found in the Open Maps catalogue and added to the Real-time Environmental Radioactivity Monitoring map using the "+" (Add layer) button of the viewer’s “Layers” panel. The ESRI REST or WMS links found in the Nuclear facilities and uranium mines and mills metadata record is what’s needed to proceed. These links can be found here: https://open.canada.ca/data/en/dataset/6478153c-829f-4649-bd52-41f63b41021f.  
  
  The Nuclear facilities and uranium mines and mills dataset provided by the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission corresponds to nuclear licensees that operate across Canada. This includes uranium mines and mills, uranium processing facilities, nuclear power plants, research reactors, particle accelerators, and nuclear substances processing facilities. All of these facilities are licensed by the CNSC and are subject to strict regulatory oversight to ensure the safety of the public and the environment.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Radiological Maps - European Commission English (en) English (en) Search Contacts Cookies Legal Notice Europa Analytics JOINT RESEARCH CENTRE Radioactivity Environmental Monitoring English (en) English (en) European Commission EU Science Hub REMon Maps Simple Consent Toggle navigation REMon About Past Activities Maps Skip to main content EURDEP Gamma Dose Rates Simple Map This map shows measurements of environmental radioactivity in the form of gamma dose rate averages and maxima for the last 24 hours. The measurements originate from approximately 5500 stations. CONSENT The EURDEP platform has no alerting function. The notification of a radiological accident or emergency is accomplished through the European Community Urgent Radiological Information Exchange (ECURIE). No action may be taken based on this data without prior consultation with the data providers. The majority of the measurements presented here are NON-VALIDATED DATA. This means that meteorological conditions such as heavy rain or snow, defects in the instruments, electronics or software, or ongoing calibration work can result in erroneous or seemingly elevated values. As a consequence, elevated levels appearing on the map, even when present on several nearby stations, CANNOT alone be taken as an indication of actual increased levels of radioactivity. WHAT THIS MEANS PRACTICALLY The radiological information contained in this website is for general information purposes only. This information is provided by national data providers and officially nominated competent authorities and while we endeavour to keep the information up to date, we make no representations or warranties of any kind, express or implied, regarding the completeness, accuracy, reliability and availability of the information with respect to this website. Any reliance you place on such information is therefore strictly at your own risk. All data that is exchanged via EURDEP are subject to copyright of the original data provider and cannot be used for other purposes, including scientific research, without their prior written agreement. Open the map I understand and accept Get more info I want to learn more Search Cookies Legal Notice Europa Analytics Accessibility report