Created: 2024-07-19T16:20:28.235407
Name: HESA_Appearance_Minister_Saks_Supplementary_Estimates_(C)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/f93c5ce5-e9fb-4cca-9c60-d26f2d8e848c/resource/3734c958-5c7c-48d8-9a07-c079647a5d2a/download/supps-c-minister-saks-proactive-disclosure-eng.pdf
Package ID: f93c5ce5-e9fb-4cca-9c60-d26f2d8e848c
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'health', 'budget']
Notes: HESA Appearance Minister Saks Supplementary Estimates (C)
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Appearance before the
House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) -
Supplementary Estimates “C”
Table of Contents
PART A. KEY LINE
Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS)
1. CDSS Approach and Effectiveness
2. Harm Reduction
3. Diversion of Prescribed Alternatives (“Safer Supply”)
4. Prescribing “Safer Supply” for Youth
5. Closing Supervised Consumption Sites
6. Supervised Consumption Sites - Community Safety / Proximity to Schools
7. Supervised Consumption Sites - South Riverdale Community Health Centre (SRCHC)
8. Drug Analysis Service (DAS) Infobase Webpage
9. Decriminalization / Countries with decriminalization models
10. Support for Decriminalization in B.C.
11. Local Bylaws for Public Use
12. British Columbia Supreme Court Ruling of Blocking New Public Drug Use Law
13. National Decriminalization
14. Possession of 2.5g (why this amount)
Treatment or Recovery Services
15. Federal Funding for Mental Health and Substance Use (MHSU)
16. Nicotine Replacement Therapy
17. Impact of Federal Funding
18. Involuntary Treatment
19. Enforcement Actions
20. Collaboration with the US on the Overdose Crisis
21. Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) Funding
22. Litigation Against Pharmaceutical Companies
23. Declaration of a Public Health Emergency
24. Implementing the Expert Task Force on Substance Use (ETFSU) Recommendations
25. Support for Indigenous Communities
26. Support for Rural and Remote Communities
27. Housing Insecurity/Homelessness and Substance Use
28. Cannabis
29. Smoking and Tobacco Use
30. 9-8-8
31. Mental Health for Children, Youth and Students
32. National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
33. Suicide Prevention
34. Wellness Together Canada (WTC) Transition/ Wellness Together Canada (WTC) Transition
Supplemental
PART B. Key Stats
35.Key Stats
Substance Use Prevalence in Canada
Costs of Substance Use and Harms in Canada
Overdose Deaths and Harms
Indigenous Peoples
Prescribed Alternatives (Safer Supply) Projects
Supervised Consumption Sites (SCS)
Naloxone Training and Distribution
Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP)
Declarations of Emergency
Federal Funding
Mental Health and Substance Use in Canada
PART C. Supplemental
36. Health Portfolio Supplementary Estimates C Overview
a. HC
b. PHAC
c. CFIA
d. CIHR
37. Line Items Crosswalk
a. HC
b. PHAC
c. CFIA
d. CIHR
38. Main Estimates
a. HC
b. PHAC
c. CFIA
d. CIHR
PART D. Supplemental
39. Follow-Ups from February 1, 2024 Appearance
40. Recent OPQs
PART A. KEY LINES
Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS)
1. CDSS Approach and Effectiveness
Since 2016, the strategy has guided our approach to substance use policy.
We’ve committed over $1 billion since 2017 to support comprehensive, collaborative, and evidence-
based substance use policy with harm reduction and treatment as a key part.
Our model is a comprehensive framework guiding our efforts to address the toxic drug and overdose
crisis, centered on promoting public health and protecting public safety.
It also supports ongoing education activities to reduce stigma and provides funding to community-led
projects targeting populations disproportionally impacted by substance use harms.
2. Harm Reduction
Harm reduction is health care. Harm reduction is the door to the system.
Safe consumption sites have responded to almost 52,000 overdoses since 2017.
Our government has invested over $200 billion to support provinces and territories delivering services
needed in addition to the $1 billion we have directly invested to address this crisis.
We will use every tool at our disposal to end the toxic drug and overdose crisis.
If pressed on Harm Reduction
No community has been left untouched by this crisis and too many people have lost family, friends and
loved ones.
We’re supporting education activities to reduce stigma and provide funding to community-led projects
targeting those most impacted by substance use harms.
We’ll keep working to ensure people who use drugs, no matter their circumstance, have the resources
and support they need when they need it.
Other Harm Reduction Tools:
Naloxone (distribution)
Supervised Consumption Sites
Prescribed alternatives
Drug checking services
Peer-to-peer support workers programs to help those with lived and living experience
3. Diversion of Prescribed Alternatives (“Safer Supply”)
The RCMP says there is no evidence to suggest the widespread diversion of drugs from prescribed
alternatives
Furthermore, the Drug Analysis Service reports that there was no increase in the in the number of
hydromorphone samples collected from drug seizures across Canada in the past decade.
What has changed is the presence of fentanyl and other contaminants in the illegal drug supply.
Fentanyl is making drugs on the street more toxic than ever. This is poisoning people who struggle with
addiction and do not know what they are consuming.
This is exactly why we need harm reduction services, including prescribed alternative programs
If pressed on diversion of prescribed alternatives
Diversion of any controlled substance is illegal, including prescription drugs containing controlled
substances.
Despite this fact, diversion does occasionally happen. This is not a new phenomenon. Examples of
diversion can include patients sharing or selling their own prescriptions, thefts from pharmacies,
pilferage in healthcare settings and prescription forgeries.
Governments share the responsibility of reducing the risk of diversion and to take action when it occurs.
If Pressed on Doctor’s Letter
I met with, and received letters from, physicians, researchers and practitioners calling for changes to
prescribed alternatives programs, as well as those calling for increased support.
We recognize that there are differing views among experts
I have asked officials to look into the program thoroughly and take appropriate action where and when
necessary.
We continue to listen and engage with experts with various views through roundtables and consultations
to learn from current experiences and inform this practice moving forward.
I have also heard during my visits to the hardest hit communities that these harm reduction
interventions are a critically important piece.
If pressed on diversion Risk in Health Canada-funded projects
Action: Officials undertook a detailed assessment of the risk mitigation measures of all federally funded
pilot projects providing pharmaceutical alternatives
Outcome: Most projects demonstrated that they had a range of protocols in place. In all cases controls
have been strengthened and new reporting requirements introduced to allow for improved oversight
and monitoring by Health Canada.
Steps Taken: Projects have implemented a number of practices to help reduce diversion risk, including:
Patient screening
Efforts to better match drugs to patient tolerance
Risk-based protocols for assessing patient eligibly for take-home dosing
Patient monitoring
Actions to address instances of diversion, which can include:
switching to observed dosing;
transfer into a different support services; or
removal from program.
On January 30th, Health Canada hosted an expert roundtable on assessing, measuring and mitigating
diversion risk related to these services.
Officials also convened federally-funded projects in February to review their protocols, share the latest
evidence and ensure they are implementing promising practices
In addition, we continue to support the evaluation of projects, to inform our actions moving forward.
These actions are important to mitigate risks. At the same time, I recognize we will need to continue to
closely monitor these projects and analyse the evidence to inform our way forward and any further
adjustments that may be needed.
If pressed on lack of evidence
The debate regarding the practice of prescribing alternatives to deadly illegal drugs has been
characterized as being highly experimental, novel, and entirely without precedence or base of evidence.
In fact, the practice of substituting illegal drugs with safer prescribed alternatives in the context of a
therapeutic relationship is not at all new.
It is a practice in addiction medicine and first-line treatment for opioid addiction that has existed for
decades in several countries, with positive results, significant published research, and established
safeguards and protocols.
What is new is the current North American context of having a supply of highly potent, deadly synthetic
drugs.
We remain committed to monitoring and evaluating current models of prescribed alternative programs
in order to improve practice and further build the evidence base.
4. Prescribing “Safer Supply” for Youth
On Prescribing Fentanyl to Kids
The B.C. Minister for Mental Health and Addictions has made public statements indicating that no
minors have been prescribed fentanyl as a part of the prescribed alternatives (or “safer supply”) program
in BC.
There are extra precautions in place to specifically protect minors with an extremely high bar for
eligibility.
Fentanyl prescribed by a physician is only done for people with opioid use disorder who would otherwise
be using street fentanyl.
We need all the tools at our disposal to address the overdose crisis.
We will continue to invest in a continuum of supports from prevention to harm reduction to treatment.
To be clear – prescribed alternative projects are meant for people who are already using illegal drugs and
are at-high risk of overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply in Canada.
The decision to provide any kind of medical intervention to a patient is a choice for medical practitioners
and patients to make based on a patient’s medical needs, safety considerations, available medical
guidelines, and applicable provincial and territorial rules and regulations.
Further, I am not currently aware of any instance elsewhere in other provinces where a minor has been
prescribed fentanyl as a part of a prescribed alternative program.
Prescribing guidelines have been developed by experts at the BC Centre on Substance Use, and apply in
the Province of BC. The guidelines make specific references to additional precautions that should be
taken if a medical practitioner is considering this intervention for young people who are using drugs from
the toxic illegal drug supply.
Health Canada did not play a role in their development, nor does Health Canada have a role in approving
medical practice guidelines.
When it comes to young people, we can all agree that maximum efforts must be made to prevent drug
use from starting in the first place. At the federal level, we continue to support a number of youth-
focused prevention initiatives to help increase awareness of the dangers of substance use, including:
developing tools to prevent substance-related harms among youth in school;
the "Know More" awareness campaign which aims to engage teens and young adults on the facts
surrounding opioids and ways to reduce risks; and
a new Youth Substance Use Prevention Program
5. Closing Supervised Consumption Sites
Supervised consumption sites (SCS) reduce the number of drug related harms and improve the health of
people who use drugs. Since 2017, SCS in Canada have responded to over 52,000 overdoses and have
seen over 4.4 million visits.
Closing supervised consumption sites would mean increasing the risk of more deaths, diseases and
infections and less access to a range of other health and social services that people rely on.
Harm reduction is health care and a pathway to care for many people. We are focused on supporting a
full range of services and supports to address the diverse needs of people who use drugs, as well as
enforcement efforts to protect our communities.
This is not the time to be pitting harm reduction against treatment. The truth is, we need them both—
and more.
We know that SCS can be inaccessible or unavailable especially in rural, remote, and Indigenous
communities and do not typically operate 24/7 or support all modes of consumption where they do
exist.
We must work with other levels of Government and partners to implement innovative solutions to
ensure more people who use drugs have access to services to prevent overdose deaths.
6. Supervised Consumption Sites - Community Safety / Proximity to Schools
Everyone deserves to feel safe and welcome in their community.
All levels of government have a shared responsibility and need to work together so that there are safe
environments for our children, while we also providing these evidence-based, l, life-saving services.
Supervised consumption sites must specify how community concerns, such as proximity to schools, will
be mitigated.
Sites are also required to have processes in place for ongoing community engagement and to take
appropriate mitigation measures to address concerns, such as foot patrols to reduce discarded drug use
equipment in public spaces around sites.
7. Supervised Consumption Sites - South Riverdale Community Health Centre (SRCHC)
We offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of Karolina Huebner-Makurat, the individual
who lost her life.
We are deeply committed to providing evidence-based services and supports to people who use drugs,
and, in doing so, we take the health and safety of those using these services, and their surrounding
communities, very seriously.
Health Canada is in constant communication with the site and worked with them to improve community
engagement, reduce loitering and improve security around the centre.
We will continue to work with them to protect both public health and public safety.
8. Drug Analysis Service (DAS) Infobase Webpage
Health Canada recognizes the tragic toll the overdose crisis and other substance use related harms are
taking on families, friends and communities across Canada.
The illicit drug market is constantly evolving. Health Canada is observing an increase of new psychoactive
substances, synthetics drugs such as Xylazine and co-occurrences such as a combination of fentanyls and
benzodiazepines.
Health Canada’s work in analyzing drug samples, producing and sharing statistical data, and supporting
drug checking services across Canada are helping fight the overdose crisis and helping Canadians make
informed choices. DAS services are available to and play an important role helping local officials and
responders with a clear understanding of the drug threats being experienced in their communities.
While the total number of drug samples analyzed by Health Canada has not increased in the past
decade, the composition of samples tested has shifted to an increase of synthetic drugs and co-
occurrences.
The use of potent substances such as fentanyl and its analogs has significantly increased based on the
samples submitted by law enforcement agencies to Health Canada, while the detection of
hydromorphone in samples received has not increased.
If pressed on recent media request “B.C. hydromorphone seizures – Globe and Mail – Andrea Woo”
(March 12, 2024)Hydromorphone is controlled in Canada under Schedule 1 to the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act.
Hydromorphone is a medication that can be prescribed and is used primarily for the relief of moderate
to severe forms of pain.
Health Canada has encountered an increase in the number of hydromorphone samples submitted by
British Columbia law enforcement agencies over the last 3-4 years.
Health Canada will continue to work closely with the province of British Columbia, as well as all other
jurisdictions, in providing required laboratory analysis.
If pressed on Additional Statistical Data
Health Canada brings together data from the Drug Analysis Service (DAS) with information from other
sources, including prescription data, to strengthen its understanding of the situation across Canada.
The proportion of the total Canadian population that received at least one opioid prescription
dispensation from a community pharmacy was 11.9% in 2022.
The proportion of opioid prescriptions in 2022 was 13.0% for women and 10.9% for men
In 2022, opioid prescription dispensations were higher in ON, BC and AB compared to the rest of the
provinces.
9. Decriminalization
BC asked for this 3 year time-limited exemption that began in January 2023.
The exemption seeks to reduce stigma and the resulting barriers to accessing health and social services
by lifting criminal penalties for the possession of small amount of drugs.
We take the safety of all Canadians seriously, that’s why from the beginning we have approached this
from both a public health and public safety perspective
This exemption will be continuously monitored assessed, adjusted if needed.
Local governments do have tools and bylaws they can amend to address any unintended consequences
or concerns, of which we have maintained we would be closely monitoring.
10. Support for Decriminalization in B.C.
A broad range of stakeholders have called for the decriminalization of personal possession as one part of
a comprehensive strategy, including: Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police, Canadian Nurses
Association, Canadian Society of Addiction Medicine, and the First Nations Health Authority.
This is in addition to a variety of drug policy experts and stakeholders, as well as municipalities and
medical officers of health.
We are constantly engaging with stakeholders with a range of views.
11. Local Bylaws for Public Use
The exemption granted to BC does not change the ability of local governments to pass or amend their
bylaws as they know the best needs of their community and how to respond to it.
Stigma has led people to die alone.
We continue to work relentlessly to reduce substance use related harms.
Our government recognizes the tremendous work B.C. has been doing across the full continuum of care
to address the overdose crisis and we will continue to work with them to save lives.
12. British Columbia Supreme Court Ruling of Blocking New Public Drug Use Law
As this matter is before the court I won’t comment further.
13. National Decriminalization
We are committed to saving lives and making sure people who use drugs don’t die alone.
Our government is committed to working, in partnership, with any jurisdictions that have a
comprehensive plan for the decriminalization of possession of small amounts of substances for personal
use.
Their plan would have to include close oversight and evaluation and ensure enhanced health and social
supports, public engagement, and law enforcement training.
We continue to work with willing jurisdictions to use all tools at our disposal to address this crisis,
including approaches to decriminalization.
14. Possession of 2.5g (why this amount)
This crisis has taken a tragic toll on families, loved ones and communities across Canada.
In granting this cumulative threshold, several sources of data were carefully considered, including
purchasing and use patterns, public health data, and law enforcement data.
The 2.5 gram cumulative threshold that was approved by Health Canada is supported by the Canadian
Association of Chiefs of Police
We continue to closely monitor the exemption to meet public health and public safety objectives.
We invite everyone to look at the evidence and listen to families and people affected by this crisis.
Treatment or Recovery Services
15. Federal Funding for Mental Health and Substance Use (MHSU)
We know our response to mental health is stronger when provided as part of integrated care.
We are transferring billions of dollars to provinces and territories to support health care, including
mental health care, over the coming years, through both an increase of the Canada Health Transfer, and
the new ten-year bilateral agreements – that’s an additional $25 billion.
Of the bilateral agreements signed so far, nearly $2.6 billion (35%) of funding has been committed to
mental health and substance use initiatives.
Mental health is one of the four shared priorities in the new bilateral agreements and integrated into the
other three.
If Pressed on Mental Health Transfer (refer to Bilateral Funding to PTs)
The 2017 investment in mental health and addictions to provinces and territories have supported the
expansion of initiatives such as integrated youth services making them more accessible and cost-
effective.
We are also working together through the Emergency Treatment Fund to facilitate and increase access to
essential treatment services to help people with problematic substance use.
We want to extend this collaborative work with transparency and accountability in order to provide
integrated mental health across all of our shared priorities with provinces and territories.
16. Nicotine Replacement Therapy
Health Canada shares the concerns expressed by health care professionals about reports of growing
popularity and recreational use of nicotine replacement therapies among youth, including access to
Zonnic and other nicotine pouches.
Health Canada authorized Zonnic as a smoking cessation tool for adults only, which is why the
department has expressed concerns and expectations to the manufacturer regarding the labeling and
advertising of their product in an effort to limit youth appeal.
Health Canada has taken steps to ensure that current advertising and product labelling of Zonnic are
compliant with the Food and Drugs Act, but we need stronger measures to help ensure that these
products are not being aggressively marketed or sold to youth.
In addition, Health Canada is implementing both short- and medium-term actions. The Department
plans to take action to strengthen government controls to prevent youth access and to protect public
health.
Health Canada continues to work with federal partners, such as the Canadian Border Services Agency
and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to monitor regulatory compliance and take enforcement action
as needed, including the removal of unauthorized products from the market.
If pressed on what is Health Canada doing to address the concerns of the health community?
The Department has communicated its strong concerns to the manufacturer to underscore the
importance of preventing youth access to the product and the expectations regarding labeling and
advertising of their products, making it clear that these products are only for use by adults over 18 years
who want to quit smoking.
Health Canada has confirmed that contracts are in place with retailers, with the exception of pharmacies,
to place the product behind the counter, with age verification required prior to sale. Health Canada has
also received confirmation from an association representing some convenience stores and gas stations
that it requires its members to age verify the product.
The Department is taking the concerns very seriously and is identifying regulatory and policy options to
prevent youth access and to consider potential new nicotine product forms.
The Department is also engaging with international counterparts who are seeing similar issues with
nicotine products in their own jurisdictions, including products that haven’t been seen yet in Canada.
If pressed on why did Health Canada authorize these products if there is a concern for youth access?
Health Canada authorizes health products based on the evidence supporting their safety, efficacy and
quality when used as directed.
Health Canada’s current regulations require that labelling for nicotine replacement products state they
are only for use by adults over 18 years of age who are trying to quit smoking, , but we need stronger
measures to help ensure that these products are not being aggressively marketed or sold to youth.
When Health Canada identifies or is notified of non-compliance, actions are taken based on the risk they
may pose to the public. A number of compliance and enforcement actions are available, including
seizures, recalls, and public communications.
If pressed on why Health Canada is not banning flavours?
The Department is reviewing its approach to regulating nicotine products and will consult with
stakeholders on potential regulatory changes to reduce the risk of youth appeal and access to these
products, while maintaining the smoking cessation objective of these products.
If pressed on why Health Canada licensed a product that is owned by the tobacco industry?
Health Canada is committed to protecting the health and safety of Canadians by reviewing the safety,
efficacy and quality of all health products before they enter the Canadian market.
If a company can successfully demonstrate that their health product is safe, efficacious when used
according to the recommended conditions for use, and of high quality and that they meet all the
requirements in the applicable laws and regulations, they can obtain a licence to sell their health product
in Canada.
Zonnic nicotine pouches were authorized by Health Canada for smoking cessation only for adults 18
years and older, and Health Canada will monitor the advertising to ensure that it is not deceptive and
that it is aligned with the intended use; it will take any post-market compliance actions it considers
necessary in case of non-compliance.
If pressed on lack of engagement with P/Ts and health organization
Health Canada has been engaging with provincial and territorial counterparts, as well as several non-
governmental organizations including health advocacy groups on possible options for restricting place-
of-sale of this product and ensuring age verification is conducted.
I commend the positive steps taken by the Minister of Health in British Columbia to reduce youth access
to these products by keeping them behind the counters at pharmacies, and by the province of Quebec
which already had regulations in place for nicotine replacement therapy products for sale in pharmacies
only but further encouraged pharmacists to also put these products behind the counter.
If pressed on what is Health Canada doing about other nicotine replacement therapies
Health Canada has written to all licence holders who sell nicotine replacement therapies to remind them
of the terms of their licencing and that products should not be advertised to youth and should be
labelled according to the terms of the authorization.
Additional requests on advertising and labelling for nicotine replacement therapies were included in the
letter, including clear age restrictions, no lifestyle advertising, and less bright colours.
If pressed on what is Health Canada doing about unauthorized nicotine replacement therapies
Health Canada does not hesitate to take action when it identifies or is notified of the sale of
unauthorized nicotine replacement therapies.
Health Canada continues to work on identifying and seizing unauthorized products in retail locations
across Canada, and disrupting the supply of these products into the country by working closely with the
Canada Border Services Agency.
The Department also issued a public advisory stressing the importance of only using authorized nicotine
pouches as directed, to not use unauthorized pouches, and to be aware of the potential health risks.
17. Impact of Federal Funding
Further to the $150 million in funding we provided through the Emergency Treatment Fund in 2018,
several provinces and territories reported important progress, including a reduction in the average wait
times to access opioid use disorder treatment.
In the Northwest Territories, average wait times for opioid agonist therapy were reduced from 5-7 days
in July 2019 to approximately 1 day after October 2019.
In Newfoundland and Labrador, average wait times for opioid agonist therapy after referral were reduced
from an average of 4-5 weeks in September 2018, to a consistent 1-2 days from 2019-2023.
In Saskatchewan, the average wait time to access an opioid agonist therapy prescriber in Saskatoon fell
by 86% (from 20.7 days in 2018-2020 to 2.8 days in 2022-23).
18. Involuntary Treatment
The evidence is clear, to reduce the harms associated with substance use, a full continuum of supports is
necessary to meet people where they are at, including treatment for those who are ready for it.
We understand that seeking treatment is an individual choice and recovery looks different for everyone.
There is no one size fits all.
Our government is fully committed to support the four pillars recognized internationally that are
necessary for a successful substance use strategy: Prevention, Harm Reduction, Treatment, Enforcement.
There is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of involuntary treatment, though the results of some
studies indicate that involuntary treatment can have negative impacts, including criminal recidivism.
We will continue to undertake and support research to build the evidence base for interventions,
including treatment approaches.
Funding for Prevention
Our prevention efforts are tailored to reach people most-at-risk.
For example, through Budget 2023, we committed $20.2 million for a new Youth Substance Use
Prevention Program to support communities across Canada build capacity to implement and adapt the
Icelandic Prevention Model.
The internationally recognized model focuses on building strong and healthy communities, instead of
targeting individual behaviour.
It has been shown to be effective in decreasing long-term substance use among youth.
In addition, we have invested in public education activities designed to raise awareness around the risks
of opioids, overdoses, and stigma reduction in youth and men-at-risk.
Know More Opioids engages teens and young adults on the facts surrounding opioids, ways to reduce
risks and the harms of stigma (over 178,000 interactions with people through school and festival events
between April 2018 and December 2023).
Ease the Burden campaign to raise awareness and reduce harms associated with the use of opioids and
other substances as well as stigma, especially for men in physically demanding jobs (over 22.8M views of
campaign video as of December 2023).
19. Enforcement Actions
The maintenance of public health and the protection of public safety are priorities for the Government
of Canada. Under federal legislation, activities with controlled substances are illegal, unless authorized
under regulations or an exemption.
We are working closely with public safety and criminal justice partners in Canada and internationally to:
help identify and disrupt the flow of illegal drugs and precursors across our borders;
identify and address money laundering of the proceeds of illegal drug trafficking; and
investigate and charge criminal actors suspected in the manufacturing and/or trafficking of illegal drugs.
Canada is working closely with the United States to disrupt the illegal drug supply, including trafficking,
through forums such as the North American Drug Dialogue and the Canada-US Opioids Action Plan.
Example: Canada and the U.S. performed a joint audit of facilities and detection technology at ports of
entry along the Canada-US border to identify existing tools with a view to sharing resources.
Example: Officers in the Canadian and U.S. Postal systems have conducted joint training in the detection
of trafficked substances.
Example: A joint Canada-U.S. initiative to target and intercept precursor chemicals from source
countries. This project focuses on precursor chemicals and clandestine laboratory equipment.
Example: We have implemented 82 safe examination areas at high-risk ports of entry to help border
services officers to identify and safely examine shipments suspected to contain opioids.
We have taken regulatory action to give law enforcement tools to take action against the illegal
importation and sale of precursor chemicals used to make synthetic drugs like fentanyl.
Those who conduct prohibited activities with controlled substances, such as trafficking or diversion, are
subject to criminal penalties. Specific questions about enforcement operations would best be directed to
my colleague, the Minister of Public Safety.
20. Collaboration with the US on the Overdose Crisis
Our government is taking strong action with our allies to disrupt the illegal drug supply globally.
Canada is active in international efforts to address drug-related issues, including trafficking, through
forums such as the North American Drug Dialogue, and in partnership with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
We work closely with the US to coordinate cross-border activities through the Canada-US Opioids Action
Plan.
Through the Trilateral Fentanyl Committee, we also collaborate with the United States and Mexico to
address the threat posed by illegal synthetic drugs, including fentanyl, in Norther America.
At a meeting on February 7, 2024, all three countries reaffirmed our commitment to address the flow of
synthetic drugs through a range of key actions, including:
Increased collaboration on the control of precursor chemicals and equipment used in illegal production;
Developing and implementing a common baseline of drugs and substances that toxicologists in all three
countries will test for in post-mortem toxicology reports; and
Hosting a forum to discuss strategies to assist the long-term recovery of individuals with substance use
disorders.
My Department also shares information regularly on drug trends, emerging drugs and clandestine lab
information with partners like the United States, to better track emerging substances and the illegal
market.
21. Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) Funding
Harm reduction is healthcare. Harm reduction is a door to the system.
Since 2015 we have supported close to 400 projects through the Substance Use and Addiction Program,
making a real difference in countless lives across the country.
We launched a Call for proposals in September for the funding announced in Budget 2023 and we expect
to have results to share in the coming months.
This is only part of our comprehensive approach, investing over $1B to fight this crisis
22. Litigation Against Pharmaceutical Companies
We are working with all provinces and territories on litigation against big pharma and those who enabled
them, and were part of the Purdue Settlement in June 2022.
Canada has also addressed pharma’s predatory practices by further restricting the marketing of opioids
and increasing maximum financial penalties.
23. Declaration of a Public Health Emergency
This Government recognizes the overdose crisis and the tragic levels of overdose deaths and harms we
are currently facing.
We are using all of our tools to take a comprehensive approach to respond to this crisis, including
significant investments of over $1 billion since 2017.
24. Implementing the Expert Task Force on Substance Use (ETFSU) Recommendations
We appreciate the excellent work of the Expert Task Force on Substance Use whose mandate was to
provide advice to inform our Government’s renewed Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy.
It is important that our actions be informed by the independent advice of experts. I have asked the
Department to reestablish an Expert Advisory Committee that would provide council and inform and
strengthen federal actions to address the overdose crisis.
This work is underway.
25. Support for Indigenous Communities
We know that Indigenous Peoples have been disproportionately impacted by the overdose crisis.
Example: In B.C. from January to June 2023, First Nations people died at six times the rate of other B.C.
residents.
Example: In Ontario, in 2021, the rate of opioid-toxicity deaths among First Nations people was seven
times higher than the rate for non-First Nations people.
Factors such as intergenerational trauma linked to colonialism and the legacy of residential schools,
systemic and institutional racism and lower socio-economic outcomes increase risks for Indigenous
Peoples.
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) is providing more than $650 million this year (2023-2024) to help
address mental wellness and substance use prevention and treatment in First Nations and Inuit
communities through its Mental Wellness Program.
As part of this Government’s comprehensive approach, I am supporting my colleague, the Honourable
Patti Hajdu, Minister of ISC, in increasing access to trauma-informed, culturally appropriate and quality
substance use services and supports.
Example: Through financial support from the Substance Use and Addictions Program, the Six Nations of
the Grand River is delivering an overdose prevention program in Ohsweken, Ontario that provides
culturally-safe harm reduction, education, and outreach services.
The program has had a positive impact in training community members in overdose response,
distributing naloxone kits, and providing harm reduction services.
CIHR is also supporting the creation of an Indigenous Engagement Platform, under CRISM, which will
encourage substance use research and knowledge mobilization that is grounded in Indigenous ways of
knowing, priorities and values.
26. Support for Rural and Remote Communities
People living in smaller communities experience 2.5 times higher opioid poisoning hospitalization rates
than those in Canada’s largest cities.
We know that people living in rural communities, including remote Indigenous communities, face
significantly higher barriers to accessing harm reduction and treatment services.
We continue to work with provinces and territories to support expanded access to services for all
Canadians, regardless of where they live.
Through Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program, we are also working to directly support
on the ground efforts in rural and remote communities impacted by this crisis as well as services
providing virtual care.
Example: Canadian Red Cross Society Equalizing Access to Naloxone and Opioid Poisoning with a Focus
on Rural, Remote and Isolated Communities
Project is helping to improve access to naloxone, reduce barriers to opioid poisoning awareness, and
improve understanding of how to help someone suffering from an opioid poisoning, with a specific focus
on improving access for populations in rural, remote, isolated and otherwise underserved communities.
Example: National Overdose Response Service (NORS)
Funding will enhance virtual overdose monitoring service infrastructure and the development of a
variety of knowledge products, including guidelines for using technology-based harm reduction services
which will be developed in conjunction with the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse
(CRISM) and project evaluation.
27. Housing Insecurity/Homelessness and Substance Use
This Government recognizes that there are many contributing factors to substance use, including
housing instability and homelessness.
I am working with provincial and territorial Ministerial counterparts to identify promising interventions
to address the complex needs of people who use substances, face mental health challenges and
experience homelessness or unstable housing.
It is essential that all levels of government, with local organizations and experts work together to provide
comprehensive supports to meet the diverse needs of individuals our communities, including those who
live in vulnerable conditions.
Specific questions about housing insecurity and homelessness would best be directed to my colleague,
Minister of Housing, Infrastructure, and Communities.
28. Cannabis
Since 2018, our Government has implemented a robust public health approach to keeping cannabis out
of the hands of youth and ensuring adults have access to a quality-controlled and regulated supply, while
reducing the illicit market.
Since legalization, rates of use among youth have not changed significantly, and more Canadians who
consume cannabis are purchasing from legal retailers.
If pressed on legislative review
On September 22, 2022, our Government launched an independent legislative review, which will assess
the progress made towards achieving the Act’s objectives. In October 2023, the Expert Panel released an
interim “What We Heard” report summarizing the views of Canadians on a range of issues.
We are looking forward to the tabling of the Expert Panel’s final report soon and appreciate the work of
the Expert Panel to include all perspectives, particularly those of Indigenous communities and
marginalized groups.
If pressed on Medical Access Regime
The Government actively monitors the medical access program and has committed to evaluate the
framework within the legislative review of the Cannabis Act.
There has been significant stakeholder interest in the access to cannabis for medical purposes
framework. This legislative review presents an opportunity to hear the views and perspectives of these
stakeholders.
If pressed on complaints regarding personal production with Health Canada authorization
Health Canada continues to take action to strengthen oversight and reduce the risk of abuse of the
program.
Under the Cannabis Regulations, Health Canada may refuse or revoke a registration on public health or
public safety grounds, including the risk of cannabis being diverted to an illicit market or activity.
As of February 29, 2024, Health Canada has refused or revoked over 3,634 registrations under the
Cannabis Regulations, including over 3026 for reasons of public health and public safety.
If pressed on paediatric cannabis poisionings
Health Canada is concerned about potential harms to children who accidentally consume cannabis.
The Department issued a public advisories in December 2021, April 2022 and May 2023. The advisory
includes guidance on how to recognize and react to cannabis poisoning.
In Spring 2023, Health Canada also launched a public education campaign to help prevent accidental
poisonings in children from edible cannabis.
Looking forward, Health Canada continues to educate Canadians on this important issue.
If pressed on non-compliant edible cannabis products that exceed the regulatory limit for THC
The Cannabis Act and its regulations were designed first and foremost to protect public health and public
safety.
Health Canada is aware of non-compliance regarding edible cannabis products with
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) quantities that exceed the allowable 10 mg per container limit.
Health Canada is working with regulated parties to ensure that they understand and comply with the
regulatory requirements.
If pressed on illegal cannabis products targeted at youth
The Cannabis Act aims to protect youth from the risks of cannabis, including restricting promotion;
prohibiting products and packaging appealing to youth; and setting THC limits.
Illegal edible cannabis often mimics common snacks and candy, and may contain harmful levels of
contaminants and dangerously high levels of THC.
The Act gives law enforcement tools to crackdown on illegal sales, including those targeting youth.
Health Canada continues to educate Canadians to understand the difference between legal and illegal
cannabis and the health and safety risks.
If pressed on youth-oriented public education campaign
We invested in evidence-based campaigns to educate youth and young adults on risks and harms of
cannabis.
In 2018, Health Canada launched Pursue Your Passion, a campaign that visited high schools and
universities across the country.
The Department also launched an updated version as a virtual, ambassador-led presentation, visiting
over 500 schools between March 2023 and January 2024.
The Department continues to work on additional efforts to educate youth and young adults on cannabis,
and more broadly, polysubstance use and mental health.
If pressed on Isreal’s anti-dumping investigation on cannabis
The import and export of cannabis for medical or scientific purposes is strictly regulated and limited to
states that are party to the UN drug conventions, and that have a legal framework for the medical or
scientific use of cannabis.
Health Canada’s import and export policy is consistent with Canada’s international obligations. Health
Canada strictly limits international trade of cannabis for medical and scientific purposes.
Health Canada supports Global Affairs Canada in their engagement with implicated Canadian exporters.
29. Smoking and Tobacco Use
Our Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using tobacco and to protecting the health of
young people and non-smokers.
Through Canada’s Tobacco Strategy, we are working to drive down tobacco use in Canada to less than 5%
by 2035.
Health Canada is updating the health-related labelling requirements to reflect the latest scientific
evidence.
We will continue to support education and to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and non-smokers
from becoming addicted to nicotine and to provide Canadians with evidence-based information on
tobacco use.
Canada recently became the first country to require written health warnings be displayed on individual
cigarettes.
If pressed on help for persons who smoke
Quitting smoking can be difficult. Our Government is committed to providing resources to help.
Our Government recently launched a campaign to raise awareness supports to help quit smoking. Over
four million dollars is also provided to partners to support the Smoke-Free Curious campaign.
People in Canada can also contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists can help
develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their community,
where available. The number for the helpline is displayed on cigarette packs.
If pressed on youth vaping
Protecting the health and safety of youth is a top priority. We are encouraged to see that vaping rates
among youth have levelled off since 2021, however, they remain too high.
We remain concerned about substance use, including youth vaping, and are taking action.
Regulations prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can be seen or
heard by youth, set a maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products, and require manufacturers
and importers to provide sales and ingredients information to Health Canada.
If pressed on the legislative review
The first review of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act found that the Act appears to be making
progress towards achieving its vaping-related objectives.
It also found more work needs to be done and identified areas for action, such as strengthening
compliance and enforcement.
Public consultations on the second review focused on tobacco, and ended on November 17, 2023. The
department is currently analyzing feedback received.
A final report will be tabled in Parliament in 2024 and will be made available online at that time.
If pressed on tobacco cost recovery
Tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of illness and premature death in Canada.
That is why we proposed in the 2023 Fall Economic Statement to amend the Tobacco and Vaping
Products Act to implement a tobacco cost recovery framework.
This framework will help minimize the cost burden on taxpayers of funding federal tobacco and vaping
activities.
Health Canada will consult broadly on the proposed cost recovery framework before implementation.
If pressed on tobacco labelling regulations
The Government of Canada is committed to increasing public awareness of the harms of tobacco use.
To this end, we refreshed warning messages and extended health warnings to all tobacco product
packages, to maintain their effectiveness.
We also require health warnings on individual tobacco products, so it would be impossible to avoid
health warnings. This is important for youth, who often get their first cigarette from a friend or sibling,
and don’t see the warnings on the pack.
If pressed on a smoke-free generation
The Government of Canada is committed to protecting youth from the dangers of tobacco use. We are
pleased to see that smoking rates among Canadian youth are at an all-time low.
We recently consulted Canadians during the second review of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act,
which focused on tobacco. We received many suggestions, including a smoke free generation and we are
analysing the feedback.
Canada is a global leader on many fronts in tobacco control, such our warnings on packaging. We
engage regularly with international counterparts to learn from each other about new measures taking
place.
30. 9-8-8
People across Canada can now call or text 9-8-8 to have access to 24/7, bilingual, trauma-informed, and
culturally appropriate suicide prevention support.
Canadians need timely access to suicide prevention – they need to know they are not alone; someone is
there to help.
Budget 2023 announced $158.4 million over 3 years to launch and implement 9-8-8, a three-digit
number for suicide prevention and emotional distress.
The Helpline is available to everyone in Canada via voice and text, 24/7, 365 days a year, in both English
and French.
The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health is leading the initiative and has recruited 39 provincial and
local crisis and distress lines to the 9-8-8 network.
In January 2024, 9-8-8 received over 700 phone calls and 400 texts per day.
If you are thinking about suicide, or worried about someone thinking about suicide, call or text 9-8-8, at
any time.
To anyone who is struggling: you are not alone, help is available.
988 is meant to be a crisis line, it’s not a proactive measure. Mental health and the ongoing supports are
needed beyond that moment of crisis.
If pressed on funding
Budget 2023 announced $158.4 million over 3 years to support the launch and implementation of 9-8-8.
Of this investment, the Public Health Agency of Canada is providing $156 million over three years to the
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health to support the implementation and operation of 9-8-8.
The remaining $2.4 million over three years is allocated to PHAC to cover costs related to the oversight,
administration, reporting, and evaluation activities associated with 9-8-8.
If pressed on how calls and texts are routed
Calls and texts to the 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline are routed based on area codes to 9-8-8 partner crisis
and distress lines. Calls and texts will be answered as close to home as possible in the official language
selected.
The intention with 9-8-8 is to minimize disruption by leveraging existing service delivery models, where
possible.
Some specialized lines, like Kids Help Phone and Hope For Wellness, are part of the 9-8-8 network and
may offer tailored support to youth and First Nations, Inuit and Métis.
If pressed on privacy and confidentiality
People calling or texting 9-8-8 are not required to share personal information with responders. While
phone numbers may be visible to responders, location information is not tracked through 9-8-8. All
responders are required to sign confidentiality agreements.
Calls and texts may be monitored or recorded for quality assurance purposes and for the safety of both
the caller or texter, and the 9-8-8 responder.
Only aggregated, non-identifiable, data will be shared with the Government of Canada and third-parties
for monitoring and reporting purposes.
If pressed on police services
If a caller is at imminent risk of seriously harming oneself or others, there is an established protocol for
transferring a 9-8-8 call to emergency services.
Responders are trained to de-escalate a crisis and the majority of calls and texts placed to 9-8-8 will not
require an emergency intervention. For example, only 3% of calls placed to Talk Suicide Canada required
emergency intervention.
CAMH continues to engage with emergency services and law enforcement stakeholders on
improvements to crisis response coordination and protocols.
If pressed on monitoring, reporting, and data
The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health will regularly share key metrics with the Public Health
Agency of Canada as part of their reporting requirements, including service volumes and wait times.
Thousands of Canadians reached out to 9-8-8 for support in December 2023, with wait times averaging
20 seconds for phone calls and approximately 1 ½ minutes for texts.
31. Mental Health for Children, Youth and Students
In 2017, our government began the transfer of $5 billion over 10 years to expand mental health services
through direct bilateral agreements with provinces and territories.
Building on these investments, we are providing an additional $25 billion over 10 years to support areas
of shared priorities including mental health and substance use care, which will see Integrated Youth
Services expanded.
We are also supporting youth through a $15 million investment in Kids Help Phone who is offering access
to free, 24/7, confidential e-mental health support via phone, text, and live chat.
Student Mental Health
Our Government recognizes the significant mental health challenges being faced by post-secondary
students, which have been exacerbated due to COVID-19.
We’re making sure our young people and youth are resilient and have the supports they need to succeed
– not fall through the cracks
We are committed to strengthening the mental health and well-being of students and we will increase
access to wrap-around services so that post-secondary students can get the help they need, when and
where they need it.
For example, we provided funding to the Canadian Mental Health Association to pilot a Peer Support
program in five universities that will train up to 225 campus-based peer supporters.
32. National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Health Canada is working with the Standards Council of Canada to develop standards and guidelines for
mental health and substance use services.
Our goal is to help ensure services meet an established level of quality and accessibility by reducing
stigma and promoting health equity.
Standards development is being informed by evidence and engagement with hundreds of stakeholders,
including people with lived and living experience.
Standards deliverables are expected to be completed in Spring 2024.
33. Suicide Prevention
Our hearts go out to all loved ones of those we have lost to suicide, and to those who struggle with
suicidal thoughts.
It is essential for Canadians to have timely access to suicide prevention – they need to know they are not
alone; someone is there to help.
People across Canada can now call or text 9-8-8 to have access to 24/7, bilingual, trauma-informed, and
culturally appropriate suicide prevention support.
Our government is also developing a new National Suicide Prevention Action Plan to be implemented to
complement the National Framework.
The Government of Canada will be releasing the first iteration of the Action Plan in the Spring 2024 with
the aim of continuing to work with partners to identify shared suicide prevention priorities and actions.
SOCI Report on the Effectiveness of the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada welcomes the findings of the Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science
and Technology, and its recommendations on how to improve the Federal Framework for Suicide
Prevention and reduce suicide rates in Canada. The SOCI recommendations have informed the areas for
action in the development of the upcoming National Suicide Prevention Action Plan.
We know that certain populations and communities are disproportionality represented in suicide rates
and that tailored, evidence-based approaches are needed.
We are committed to collaboration and ongoing engagement with all partners, including Indigenous
partners.
Timeline for Release
The Government of Canada is committed to developing a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan that
will set the stage for collective action on suicide prevention.
The Action Plan will be evergreen, adopting an iterative approach to enable ongoing, meaningful
engagement, collaboration and a shared commitment to further action with partners.
We are actively working with partners, including provinces and territories to identify shared priorities,
starting with 9-8-8.
The first iteration of the Action Plan is expected to be released in the Spring 2024.
34. Wellness Together Canada (WTC) Transition
During the COVID-19 pandemic, we launched Wellness Together Canada to address an urgent need for
mental health supports.
As this global health crisis has ended, we will be transitioning away from these emergency supports as of
April 3, 2024.
Canadians will still have access to resources, supports, and services at Canada.ca/mental-health.
We are transferring billions of dollars to provinces and territories to support health care, including
mental health care, over the coming years through both an increase of the Canada Health Transfer, and
the new ten-year bilateral agreements – that’s an additional $25 billion.
If pressed
Every Canadian should have access to quality mental health supports when and where they need it.
Provinces and territories are best placed to support the needs of their communities by integrating these
services into their whole system of care.
We’ll continue to work with the provinces and territories through the bilateral health care agreements
and with partners and stakeholders to ensure people across the country have access to the support they
need to thrive.
Wellness Together Canada (WTC) Transition Supplemental
Number of Canadians served by WTC
As of March 2024, this investment by the Government of Canada has served over 4.36 million individuals
across all provinces and territories who have accessed the Wellness Together Canada portal in over 12
million web sessions.
From April 2020 to February 2024, there have been over 207,000 adult counselling sessions, and there
were over 185,000 texting sessions conducted for both youth and adults.
Government of Canada’s continuing support to help connect Canadians with eligible PT resources
The Government of Canada is confident in the capacity of every province and territory to ensure no
Canadian is left behind.
The federal government renewed the canada.ca/mental-health webpage to better serve as a navigation
tool for Canadians to refer them to local resources and access services available from their respective
province or territory.
The page features available resources and links from each of the provinces and territories to help
Canadians find the mental health supports they need when they need them.
For example:
1. Residents of Alberta will find:
211 Alberta: a crisis supports and virtual service, available 24/7
Alberta Mental Health Line: a confidential support, information and referral service staffed by mental
health professionals and available 24/7
Alberta Addiction Health Line: a rapid access counselling service staffed by mental health professionals
and available 24/7
2. Residents of Quebec will find:
Government of Quebec: provincial website with information on mental health and how to find support.
Info-Social 811: a free confidential telephone consultation service to connect with a psychosocial worker,
available 24/7
Tel-jeunes and parents: a phone, text, and chat counselling for youth 12 to 17 and their parents,
available daily from 8am to 10pm. Some services are available from 6am to 2am.
3. In New Brunswick, residents can find:
1. Government of New Brunswick: Addictions and Mental Health provincial website with information on
mental health and addictions supports and services.
2. Addiction and Mental Health Helpline: a toll-free phone helpline available 24/7
3. Bridge the gApp: an online mental health resource connecting individuals to local services,
information, and tools.
4. 211 New Brunswick: information and referral service for social, community and government support
and services, available 24/7. Online chat is available Monday to Friday, 8am to 10pm
Consultations and Engagement
Mental health experts/advocates
Before arriving at a decision, the Government of Canada carefully considered the changing landscape
since the launch of WTC in April 2020: easing of the COVID-19 pandemic; new bilateral funding to the
provinces and territories (including for mental health and substance use); increase in availability of
virtually delivered mental health services in provinces and territories; the availability of resources such
as Kids Help Phone, and the launch of the 9-8-8 suicide crisis helpline (launched November 30, 2023).
PART B. Key Stats
35. Key Stats
Substance Use Prevalence in Canada
Use of Illegal Drugs (past-year, including heroin, cocaine, etc. obtained from illegal drug market)
General Population: 3% in 2019 (the most recent data available) – Rates are stable since 2017 (CADS,
2019)
Youth: 7% in youth grades 7-12 and 12% in post-secondary students in 2021-22 (CSTADS, 2021-22;
CPADS, 2021-22).
use is higher among transgender, gender diverse and/or questioning students
Use of Pharmaceuticals (including opioid-pain relievers and sedatives) for Non-Therapeutic Reasons
(past-year)
General population: 2% in 2019 (the most recent data available)
this is 4X the rate in 2013 (0.5%) and 2X the rate in 2017 (1%) (CADS, 2019)
Youth: 7% in youth grades 7-12 and 13% among postsecondary students (CSTADS, 2021-22; CPADS, 2021-
22).
Costs of Substance Use and Harms in Canada (Source: CCSA & CSUCH, Canadian Substance Use Costs
and Harms, 2023.)
Substance use cost Canada more than $49 billion, and led to over 200 deaths every day in 2020
Opioids alone accounted for $7.1 billion (14.4% of total costs)
This includes healthcare/criminal justice costs, lost productivity and other direct costs
Overdose Deaths and Harms
There were 40,642 apparent opioid toxicity deaths between January 2016 and June 2023
In the first 6 months of 2023 (Jan-June):
There were approx. 22 deaths a day
Fentanyl was involved in 84% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths.
80% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths involved opioids that were only non-pharmaceutical in origin
Most accidental opioid toxicity deaths occurred in:
men (72%)
people aged 20-59 (90%)
Multiple substance use is a factor:
54% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths involved a stimulant
81% of accidental stimulant toxicity deaths involved an opioid
Impacts on broader health system as well:
24% increase in opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations in Canada during the first two years of the
pandemic (April 2020-March 2022), compared to the two years prior to the pandemic (April 2018-March
2020) (CCSA, 2022).
Regional Variations
89% of accidental opioid-related deaths occurred in B.C., Alberta and Ontario from January to June 2023
– although rates were also elevated in Saskatchewan and Yukon.
Comparison to the U.S.
Since 2016, trends in opioid-related deaths have evolved similarly in both countries. However, the
magnitude of the crisis has been greater in the US.
In 2022, there were 28.7 opioid-related deaths per 100,000 population in the US compared to 19.3
opioid-related deaths per 100,000 population in Canada.
There are also similarities in the characteristics of opioid-related deaths in the two countries; notably,
more deaths occurred among males and middle-aged individuals, and fentanyl was present in a
significant proportion of those deaths.
Nearly 88% of opioid-involved overdose deaths involved synthetic opioids (e.g., fentanyl and analogues)
while in Canada 86% of opioid-involved overdose deaths involved fentanyl and 20% involved fentanyl
analogues (note: due to data limitations, a death involving fentanyl could also involve a fentanyl
analogue).
Indigenous Peoples
Across Canada, Indigenous Peoples are overrepresented in terms of substance-related deaths.
Example: In B.C. from January to June 2023, First Nations people died at 6.0 times the rate of other B.C.
residents.
In the first six months of 2023 (January to June) – First Nations women died from an overdose at 11.9X
the rate of non-First Nations women in BC.
Example: In Saskatchewan, in 2023, twice as many First Nations females (52) died from accidental deaths
involving opioids than Caucasian females (26).
Example: In Alberta, while First Nations people only make up 6% of the population, they represent 22%
of all opioid poisoning deaths from January to June 2020.
Example: In Ontario, in 2021, the rate of opioid-toxicity deaths among First Nations people was seven
times higher than the rate for non-First Nations people.
Substance Use & Women
Between January 2016 and June 2023 – women made up 25-30% of all opioid related deaths, and 38-
50% of opioid-related hospitalizations.
Between September and December 2020, 16.2% of women self-reported an increase in their alcohol
consumption.
2021-22 – 19% of high school female students reported cannabis use
Prescribed Alternatives (Safer Supply) Projects
As of March 1, 2024:
There are 29 federally-funded projects currently active, 25 of which provide direct service delivery.
Active sites serve approximately 3,251 clients in 3 provinces (B.C., Ontario, and New Brunswick). QC
receives funding that they manage for safer supply projects.
Since 2018, HC has supported 31 projects through SUAP with total funding commitment of over $102
million
Supervised Consumption Sites (SCS)
There are currently 39 SCS offering services in Canada
Between October 2017 and October 2023 at SCS in Canada:
There were over 4.4 million visits (exact number: 4,480,823)
There were at least 389,000 unique clients (exact number: 389,843)
Over 52,000 overdoses were attended to (exact number: 52,997)
Staff made over 424,000 referrals to health and social services (exact number: 424,305)
Naloxone Training and Distribution
SUAP-funded naloxone projects have resulted in:
the training of more than 1.5 million Canadians on how to respond to an overdose, including 153,730
trained on how to administer naloxone
more than 69,000 nasal naloxone kits distributed across Canada (as of May 2023).
Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP)
As on March 1, 2024, $575M was committed for to 389 projects through SUAP since 2017 to address the
overdose crisis, and substance use overall.
Currently, the program is supporting 247 innovative harm reduction, treatment and prevention projects
that meet the needs of disproportionately impacted populations at the community-level.
Through the 2023 Federal Budget, $144 million in new funding for SUAP was announced which will allow
the program to support a new cohort of projects stemming from a Call for Proposals launched in
September 2023.
SUAP provides time-limited funding for a wide range of innovative and evidence-informed projects
including substance use prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across the country.
Projects target a range of substances, including opioids, stimulants, cannabis, alcohol, nicotine and
tobacco, at the community, regional and national levels .The program supports innovative projects across
the country, including the North.
As of March 31, 2023, SUAP-funded projects have created a total of:
6,619 knowledge products including pamphlets, publications, knowledge hubs, training curriculums,
guidelines, apps, and toolkits;
64,437 learning opportunities including training sessions, conferences, webinars, and communities of
practice; and,
2,860 new services including harm reduction, counselling, treatment, safer supply, and drug checking.
Active Projects – Breakdown (as of March 4, 2024)
There are currently 247 active SUAP projects across the country, representing $401M in federal funding.
The breakdown of active projects by PT is as follows:
AB: 18 BC: 68 MB: 17 NB: 4 NL: 8 NS: 11 NT: 2 NU: 1 ON: 104 PEI: 2 QC: 3* SK: 6 YK: 3
The Province of Quebec receives SUAP funding on a per-capita basis (approximately 22.5% of SUAP
contribution funding). Funding is administered through contribution agreements with the Ministère de la
Santé et des Services sociaux.
Active SUAP projects that focus on the following pillars:
Harm reduction: 144
Treatment: 40
Prevention: 30
Multiple Pillars: 34
Active SUAP projects include projects that focus on the following priority populations:
Indigenous led and/or focused: 63
Youth-focused: 14
2SLGBTQIA+led and/or -focused: 52
Rural and Remote Communities: 45
Active SUAP projects that target the following substances:
Opioids: 82
Alcohol: 5
Tobacco: 4
Cannabis: 6
Methamphetamine: 10
Polysubstance: 136
Declarations of Emergency
Numerous jurisdictions (provinces and territories, municipalities and First Nations) across British
Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick and the Yukon have various
emergency declarations with regards to the overdose crisis, substance use, mental health and/or
homelessness.
P/T Declarations:
British Columbia – Public Health Emergency – April 2016
Alberta – Public Health Crisis – May 2017
Yukon – Call to Action (Substance Use Health Emergency) – January 2022
In 2024 alone, emergency declarations have been made by the City of Belleville, Ontario as several First
Nations communities across BC, Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario.
Federal Funding
General Overview:
Overdose Crisis – since 2017, investments of over $1B (including $359.2M in Budget 2023)
The Government of Canada will increase PT funding by $200B over 10 years (including $25B for shared
health priorities).
The $25B is on top of 2017 PT bilateral agreements which includes $5B over 10 years for Mental Health
and Addictions services.
Regular Support to PTs via Canada Health Transfers
CHT – $49.4B (an increase of 9.3%) (2023-2024), $52.1B (2024-2025)
$11B to QC (2023-2024), $11.54B (2024-2025)
Bilateral Agreement Funding Included in Working Together Plan
$25B over 10 years (Budget 2023) to support family health services, health workers and backlogs, mental
health and substance use, and a modernized data system through tailored bilateral agreements.
Collectively, of the bilateral agreements signed to date, nearly 35% (approximately $2.6 billion) of the
overall Working Together funding is being targeted towards mental health and substance use initiatives
(one of four shared priorities).
As per the 2017 CSOP funding: the largest total investments in MHSU initiatives are BC ($246M), AB
($426M), and ON ($1.5B). PE is the only PT that has allocated less than 10% of combined CSOP and new
funding for MHSU ($7.8M).
The largest total investments in MHSU initiatives are BC (20.2%; $1,200M), AB (39.8%; $1,070M), and ON
(47.8%; $3,190M).
Overall, PTs have adopted an integrated posture with respect to MHSU. It is, therefore, challenging with
currently available information to disaggregate PT funding allocations for mental health from substance
use.
Research Funding:
Over the last five years, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested $90.6 million on
opioid research, which includes funding to the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse
(CRISM), a pan-Canadian research network that seeks to identify and develop clinical and community-
based interventions for substance use disorders.
Other Bilateral Agreement Support:
Emergency Treatment Fund – $150M for 5 years (Budget 2018). The ETF provided support to PTs to help
address the opioid crisis by enhancing access to treatment.
Mental Health and Substance Use in Canada
50% of people with schizophrenia also have a substance use disorder
50% of those in substance use treatment live with mental illness
many of hospitalizations related to opioid use disorder and opioid overdose include co-diagnosis of
another mental health disorder (56% and 43%, respectively)
Population Mental Health
2022 - 53% of Canadians rated their mental health as “Excellent or very good”, down from 2021 (59%)
Nearly 1 in 5 Canadians reported a need for mental health care in 2020.
45% of those who had a need reported that their needs were either unmet or only partially met.
People with a mental illness are 2X as likely to have a substance use disorder
At least 20% of people with a mental illness having a co-occurring substance use disorder..
Indigenous Mental Health
2021 – only 51% of Indigenous Peoples in Canada reported excellent or very good mental health,
compared to 59% of white Canadians, and 62% of racialized non-Indigenous individuals.
2021 – Over 1 in 4 Indigenous Peoples (27%) reported having an anxiety or mood disorder, compared to
17% of white individuals, and 6% of racialized non-Indigenous individuals.
2020 – 13% of Indigenous Peoples had unmet needs for mental health care, compared to 8% of white
individuals, and 7% of racialized non-Indigenous individuals.
2019 Stats Canada Report – the suicide rate (2011-2016) among First Nations people (24.3 deaths per
100,000) was three times higher than the rate among non-Indigenous people (8.0 deaths per 100,000).
Indigenous Peoples represent 39% of shelter users, but comprise 5% of the Canadian population.
Standards for Mental Health & Substance Use (MHSU)
March 2022 - HC partnered with the Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to coordinate the development
of standards and related deliverables.
The 6 priority areas include:
1. Integration of MHSU in Primary Care;
2. Digital MHSU Apps;
3. IYS;
4. Integrated MHSU Services for Complex Needs;
5. Substance Use Treatment Centres – Withdrawal Management; and
6. Substance Use Workforce – Substance Use Health Competencies for Prescribers
Integrated Youth Services (IYS)
Budget 2023 funding through tailored bilateral agreements and ongoing Budget 2017 funding for mental
health and substance use is supporting the expansion of IYS.
As of 2023, there are 91 active IYS sites in Canada, and another 48 under development.
PART C. Supplemental
36. Health Portfolio Supplementary Estimates C Overview
Health Canada Overview
(In dollars)
Authorities to Date
Supplementary Estimates (C) Transfers Adjustments
Proposed Authorities to Date
% Change in Proposed Authorities due to these estimates
% Change in Proposed Authorities to Date this Year Over last Year
Voted
6,912,290,144
899,808 3,715,290
6,916,905,242
0.1%
67.0%
Statutory
528,398,090
- 475,599
528,873,689
0.1% (76.8)%
Total Budgetary
7,440,688,234
899,808 4,190,889
7,445,778,931
0.1%
16.0%
Health Canada has proposed a net increase of $5.1M in the 2023-24 Supplementary Estimates (C),
bringing its proposed authorities to date to $7,445.8M. These Supplementary Estimates include:
Voted Appropriations of $4.6M:
New Funding [$3.7M]
$2.1M – Building a World-Class Health Data System for Canadians (Budget 2023); and,
$1.6M – Funding for the Action plan for Official languages 2023-2028: Protection-promotion-
collaboration (Budget 2023).
Transfers [$0.9M]
Transfers to Health Canada (+$2.5M)
$2.0M – From the Treasury Board Secretariat to support the Employee Assistance Services' Black-centric
Engagement and Advancement Team; and,
$0.5M – From the Department of Indigenous Services to provide microbiological and physical-chemical
testing of drinking water in First Nation communities.
Transfers from Health Canada (-$1.6M)
-$15.0K – To the Treasury Board Secretariat (Office of the Comptroller General) for the Transfer Payments
Innovation Agenda;
-$40.0K – To the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development's standardized digital health evaluation framework;
-$750.0K – To the Public Health Agency of Canada support the World Health Organization advancing
climate resilient and low carbon health systems; and,
-$800.0K – To the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support research activities related to health
and climate change.
Statutory Appropriations of $0.5M
$0.5M – EBP amount related to approved Treasury Board submission:
$0.5M – Building a World-Class Health Data System for Canadians.
Public Health Agency of Canada
(In dollars)
Authorities to Date
Supplementary Estimates (C) Transfers Adjustments Total
Proposed Authorities to Date
Voted
5,364,936,486
(600,149) 1 (600,148)
5,364,336,338
Statutory
91,349,421
- - -
91,349,421
Total Budgetary
5,456,285,907
(600,149) 1 (600,148)
5,455,685,759
The Public Health Agency of Canada will be decreasing its reference levels by $600.1K.
Transfers to/from Other Government Departments (-$600.1K):
From the Department of Health to support the World Health Organization advancing climate resilient
and low carbon health systems ($750.0K);
From the Department of Health to support the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development’s standardized digital health evaluation framework ($40.0K);
To the Treasury Board Secretariat for the Transfer Payments Innovation Agenda (-$15.0K);
To the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to strengthen domestic governance around
antimicrobial resistance in agricultural sectors (-$200.0K);
To the Canadian Food Inspection Agency to support an assessment on antimicrobial resistance and use in
food producing animals (-$285.0K); and
To the Department of Employment and Social Development for activities related to the Indigenous Early
Learning and Child Care Transformation Initiative (-$890.1K).
Internal Transfers (zero impact on reference levels):
Internal reallocation of resources for the development of national antimicrobial resistance prescribing
guidelines and to address sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections in prisons and the increasing
rates of syphilis ($2M)
Voted Appropriations - adjustment ($1)
Funding to authorize the listing and adjustment of grants ($1). This is an administrative measure required
by TBS to signal that an appropriation bill is necessary to list and increase the Agency’s grants arising
from the World Health Organization and Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
transfers.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency Overview
(In dollars)
Supplementary Estimates (C) Transfers Adjustments Total
% Change in Proposed Authorities due to Supplementary Estimates (C)
% Change in Proposed Authorities to Date this Year Over Last Year
Voted
285,000
11,200,380 11,485,380 1.5%
2.8%
Statutory
-
185,290 185,290 0.1%
(0.2%)
Total Budgetary
285,000
11,385,670 11,670,670 1.2%
2.3%
Canadian Food Inspection Agency has proposed a net increase of $11.7M in the 2023-24 Supplementary
Estimates (C) based on:
Voted Appropriations of $11.5M:
Adjustments – increase of $11.2M
$11.2M – Funding for the Foot-and-Mouth Disease Vaccine Bank for Canada (Budget 2023).
Transfers – net increase of $0.3M
$0.3M - From the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Canadian Food Inspection Agency to support an
assessment on antimicrobial resistance and use in food producing animals.
Statutory Appropriations of $0.2M:
Employee Benefit Plan adjustments related to increased Supplementary Estimates (C) salary funding for
the following:
$0.2M – Funding for the Foot-and-Mouth Disease Vaccine Bank for Canada (Budget 2023).
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
ADJUSTMENTS TO CIHR’S AVAILABLE AUTHORITIES
(In $ millions)
Vote 1 Operating Expenditures
Vote 5 Grants
Subtotal
Statutory Items
Total
Authorities to Date
76.0
1,282.2
1,358.2
8.9
1,367.1
Supplementary Estimates (C)
(0.2)
1.2
1.0
0.0
1.0
Proposed Authorities to Date1
75.8
1,283.4
1,359.2
8.9
1,368.1
Note 1: Totals may not add due to rounding.
As a result of Supplementary Estimates (C), CIHR’s overall authorities will increase by approximately $1.0
million to a total of $1,368.1 million.
Transfers from Other Departments and Agencies – Increase of $ 1.2 million
$0.8 million from the Department of Health to support research activities related to health and climate
change; and
$0.4 million from the Department of Indigenous Services for the Healthy Youth Initiative.
Transfers to Other Departments and Agencies – Decrease of $0.2 million
$0.1 million to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council and the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council for the administration and operations of the Secretariat on Responsible
Conduct of Research; and
$0.1 million to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council for the development of a common
grants management solution.
Internal Transfer between CIHR's Transfer Payment Programs – Nil Financial Impact
Internal reallocation of resources from the Institute support grants to the Grants for research projects
and personnel support ($0.3M).
37. Line Items Crosswalk
Health Canada
Funding to building a World-Class Health Data System for Canadians (Budget 2023)
Total: $2,590,890
SPB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
The Government of Canada made historic investments of nearly $200 billion over ten years through the
Working together to improve health care for Canadians plan.
As part of this plan, federal, provincial and territorial governments made important data commitments
to support health system improvements by improving how health information is collected, shared, used
and reported to Canadians to promote greater transparency on results, and enable Canadians to better
access their own health information.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
This first year of funding will support Health Canada’s critical leadership and convenor role to support
Canada’s transformation towards a world-class health data system and these data commitments under
the Working Together to Improve Healthcare for Canadians plan.
Health Canada will play a key role with respect to targeted engagement, leadership, strategic oversight,
policy development, coordination, implementation, program administration, and monitoring and
evaluation in advancing the federal vision for a world class health data system.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
Funding to Health Canada is expected to support broader Working Together plan investments towards
the following results:
Lead and convene FPT and pan-Canadian health organization (PCHO) collaboration on the five data
commitments of the Working Together plan, including policy and legislative alignment with an initial
focus on national data stewardship and work outlined in the FPT action plan;
Transparency on health system improvements through refinement of the common FPT indicators for the
Working Together plan;
Work with Infoway, CIHI, Statistics Canada, and PTs to advance national data standards, guided by the
Interoperability Roadmap;
Work with CIHI to transform its ability to provide timely, and quality data;
Better alignment of national health data organizations towards common objectives;
Establish Health Workforce Canada to gain a better understanding of the issues and policy
recommendations for addressing health human resource issues; and
Support a multipronged FPT approach to building public trust and data literacy.
Voted
2,115,291
Statutory
475,599
Funding for the Action plan for Official languages 2023-2028: Protection-promotion-collaboration
(Budget 2023)
Total: $1,599,999
SPB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
Under the Action Plan for Official Languages 2023-2028, Health Canada’s Official Languages Health
Program (OLHP) will receive a total of $14.5 million over five years (2023-24 to 2027-28) in new funding
under Vote 10 - Contributions, including $1.6 million in 2023-24.
Of the total new funding, $8 million over five years will be allocated to three targeted OLHP recipients to
increase their core funding to maintain their current level of activity in the context of high inflation
(referred to as “indexation funding”). The organizations are:
The Société Santé en français (SSF) – $3.4 million over five years.
The Community Health and Social Services Network (CHSSN) – $2.9 million over five years.
The National Secretariat of the Association des collèges et universités de la francophonie canadienne,
Consortium national de formation en santé component (ACUFC-CNFS) - $1.7 million over five years.
The remaining $6.5 million over fours years (referred to as “training and retention funding,” and starting
in 2024-25) will be distributed to nine postsecondary institutions to train and retain new bilingual health
professionals, including nurses and personal care workers.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
The new indexation funding will be provided to targeted OLHP recipients that are not-for-profit
organisations and that rely mostly on HC funding to enable them to achieve the stability needed to focus
their efforts on improving access to health services for official language minority communities (OLMCs)
in the minority official language.
The new funding for training and retention initiatives will contribute to addressing the shortage of health
human resources in OLMCs, including in priority areas such as nursing and personal care worker
programs, which were exacerbated by the COVID 19 pandemic, as well as ongoing issues recruiting and
retaining bilingual health professionals that can serve OLMCs in the minority official language.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
Indexation funding will allow recipients to pursue their activities fostering access to health services for
OLMCs, such as the development and maintenance of partnerships with communities, health
professionals, health services managers, political decision makers and post-secondary institutions, as
well as the development of learning products and opportunities for these partners.
Training and retention funding will allow (over fours years and starting in 2024-25): 140 new enrollments
in bilingual nursing programs, 38 new enrollments in bilingual personal support worker programs and 40
to 60 bursaries for bilingual graduates to retain new health professional in OLMCs for at least two years.
Voted
1,599,999
Statutory
-
From the Treasury Board Secretariat to the Department of Health to support the Employee Assistance
Services' Blackcentric Engagement and Advancement Team
Total: $1,960,916
CSB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
Under the mental health pillar of Treasury Board Secretariat of Canada’s (TBS) Action Plan for Black
Public Servants announced in Budget 2023, TBS will transfer $5.9 million in funding over three years
(beginning in FY 2023-2024) to Health Canada (HC) to enhance how its Employee Assistance Program
(EAP) is promoted to and experienced by Black employees.
HC’s EAP delivers short-term mental health supports, including a crisis call centre and referrals to a
national network of contracted mental health professionals, to over 90 federal departments and
agencies, including the RCMP and Canadian Forces, and Veterans. EAP support is also extended to
immediate family members.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
Enhancements will be undertaken across four pillars:
Targeted recruitment of Black counsellors to improve and promote referrals aligned with identity or lived
experience;
Training for EAP counsellors and staff on systemic anti-Black racism, with trauma informed and culturally
competent approaches;
Data and technology enhancements, primarily the increased collection and analysis of disaggregated
data while leveraging research on the social determinants of Black mental health to inform data
collection and evaluation methods; and
Communication improvements to promote EAP as a trusted resource for Black employees and their
immediate families.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
Through this proposal, HC anticipates an increased uptake of EAP services by Black employees, strong
self-reported levels of satisfaction with those services by Black clients and self-reported indications that
the services are having a positive outcome on Black clients’ resilience and general well-being.
Voted
1,960,916
Statutory
-
From the Department of Indigenous Services to the Department of Health to provide microbiological and
physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities
Total: $543,892
ROEB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
In collaboration with Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) in the Quebec Region, HC supports the delivery of
clean, safe, and reliable drinking water to First Nations by conducting microbiological and physico-
chemical analyses of drinking water in First Nation communities.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
The purpose of conducting microbiological and physico-chemical analyses of drinking water in First
Nation communities is to:
Regularly monitor all publicly accessible drinking water systems (public drinking water systems and semi-
public systems in 28 First Nations communities in Quebec); and,
Provide well water bacteriological testing services to residents, upon request and free of charge.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
The funds will allow HC laboratories to perform microbiological and physico-chemical analyses of
drinking water.
This will contribute to ensuring that First Nations have access to clean, safe and reliable drinking water.
Voted
543,892
Statutory
-
From the Department of Health to the Treasury Board Secretariat (Office of the Comptroller General) for
the Transfer Payments Innovation Agenda
Total: ($15,000)
SPB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
Transfer payments represent a significant proportion of Health Canada and federal government
spending.
Lessons learned from pandemic programming, advances in technology for service delivery, and the
Budget 2023 imperative to realize efficiency savings all support enterprise-wide efforts to undertake a
Transfer Payment Renewal and Innovation Agenda.
Treasury Board Secretariat (TBS) and departmental colleagues will work collaboratively to address
priorities and to leverage efforts across the system.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
The transfer of funds to TBS will support their efforts to build capacity to play an integration role and to
support modernization of grants and contributions.
Specific areas of focus for the Renewal and Innovation Agenda include:
Digital and data;
Transfer payment policies and processes, and
People and culture.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
The Renewal and Innovation Agenda will realise efficiencies across the design and delivery of transfer
payments.
In 2023-24, expected deliverables include:
A streamlined Gs&Cs Treasury Board submission process;
Work initiated on process standardization, to reduce the number of touchpoints and approval time; and
Basic learning resources to support the practitioner community.
Voted
(15,000)
Statutory
-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development's standardized digital health evaluation framework
Total: ($40,000)
SPB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
The implementation of digital health solutions (DHS) into clinical practices facilitate improvements within
the integrated healthcare model. In order to realize DHS benefits, developing an integrated healthcare
system that promotes greater connection, collaboration and communication is essential.
A standardized approach in assessing digital health technologies (DHTs), alongside guidance on evidence
standards for researchers and innovators, could improve decision making about, and investments into,
DHTs and ensure that new DHTs are clinically effective while offering value to the health care system.
A standardized framework would assist health policymakers in the development of regulatory, clinical,
and pricing and reimbursement guidelines for digital health solutions in a similar fashion to those that
are already in place (e.g. for both pharmaceuticals and medical devices).
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
Health Canada will fund an OECD project to strengthen the use of DHTs through the creation of a
common/standardized framework, leveraging international evidence and best practices to support,
strengthen and transform current health public systems.
The standardized framework will support consistent DHT research, regulatory, and implementation
practices that should allow for comparable data and interoperability across countries.
The framework will also develop a set of specific evidence standards for DHTs to facilitate effective and
equitable evaluation strategies and reimbursement decisions.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
The project will explore gaps and best practices in current regulations and evaluation frameworks, and
identify challenges and opportunities including by reviewing international models and approaches.
t will establish a robust digital health assessment methodology with an identification of the necessary
criteria for evaluating DHTs and what constitutes suitable evidence.
It will support the creation of universal digital health interoperability standards to address the issues in
the lack of interoperability as critical barrier for the adoption of digital health technologies.
Voted
(40,000)
Statutory
-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the World Health
Organization in advancing climate resilient and low carbon health systems
Total: ($750,000)
HECSB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
Health Canada is transferring $750,000 to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to issue a grant
(through the International Health Grants Program, IHGP) to the World Health Organization to support
work on building climate resilient and low-carbon health systems and strengthening international
coordination and progress on addressing the health impacts of climate change.
The IHGP is managed by PHAC on behalf of the Health Portfolio and is a well-established mechanism to
provide funding to international organizations for initiatives with global health implications, including
climate change. It enables Canada to support work with a global reach and to access international
expertise for Canada’s benefit.
This funding is part of the implementation of the health and well-being pillar of the National Adaptation
Strategy.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
The objectives of these investments are to support international coordination and action, such as
through the Alliance for Transformative Action on Climate and Health, to address the health impacts of
climate change and build climate resilient and low carbon health systems.
This includes addressing urgent climate-related risks to the health of people in Canada from extreme
heat and increasing the climate change resilience of Canada’s health systems.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
The funding will support the World Health Organization with advancing climate resilient and low carbon
health systems through activities such as international scientific and evidence gathering, best practice
sharing, and development of evidence-based tools.
This work will develop knowledge and build capacity to advance efforts to build climate resilient health
systems.
Voted
(750,000)
Statutory
-
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support research
activities related to health and climate change
Total: ($800,000)
HECSB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
Health Canada is transferring $800,000 to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to support
research activities related to health and climate change.
Research is needed to support protecting and improving human health and well-being in Canada from
the impacts of climate change.
CIHR is the established federal agency responsible for health research funding. CIHR has the research
funding expertise, scientific networks and research funding infrastructure needed to manage and
disburse funds to the best available researchers. This funding is part of the implementation of the health
and well-being pillar of the National Adaptation Strategy.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
The objectives of these investments are to support CIHR in issuing grants to advance research initiatives
and activities in climate change and health.
This supports core health research objectives including investigating critical gaps in climate-health risks
and climate-sensitive health outcomes in Canada and building the evidence base for examining current
and future climate health adaptation and mitigation options and actions and increasing the climate
change resilience of Canada’s health systems.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
The funding will fill critical research gaps and strengthen the evidence to inform climate change and
health policies, actions, and interventions.
The work will support research on building climate resilient and low-carbon health systems. Evidence will
be placed in the public domain to be accessed by all interested parties.
Voted
(800,000)
Statutory
-
Public Health Agency of Canada
VOTED APPROPRIATIONS
Name
Purpose /Objectives
Voted
Item
Funding to authorize the listing and adjustment of grants
Purpose /Objectives
The $1 is required in TBS’s estimates software to signal that an appropriation bill is necessary to list and
increase the Agency’s grants. The grants to be listed will fall under International Grants. The grant
increase is due to funding received through the following two external transfers;
From the Department of Health to support the World Health Organization advancing climate resilient
and low carbon health systems ($750K); and
From the Department of Health to support the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development’s standardized digital health evaluation framework ($40K).
Voted
$1
TRANSFERS
Name
Items
Transfer from the Department of Health to support the World Health Organization advancing climate
resilient and low carbon health systems
$750,000
Key Messages
Canada continues to advance knowledge, capacity and innovation in adapting to the health risks
associated with climate change and supports efforts to build climate-resilient and low-carbon health
systems, and protect and improve the health of people living in Canada in a changing climate.
This transfer of funding will:
Leverage the Health Portfolio’s International Health Grants Program (IHGP);
Provide grant funding to the WHO to support with advancing climate resilient and low carbon health
systems;
Purpose /Objectives
The purpose of the work will be to support international coordination and action, such as through the
Alliance for Transformative Action on Climate and Health (ATACH), to address the health impacts of
climate change and build climate resilient and low carbon health systems.
Expected Results
The WHO will support with advancing climate resilient and low carbon health systems through activities
such as:
International scientific and evidence gathering and consensus building;
Best practice sharing; and
Development of evidence-based tools such as guidance documents, communications materials,
indicators, knowledge translation materials, training events, curricula, among others.
This work will support with developing knowledge and building capacity to advance efforts to building
climate resilient health systems.
Voted
$750,000
Statutory
$0
Name
Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development's standardized digital health evaluation framework
$40,000
Key Messages
The implementation of digital health solutions (DHS) into clinical practices will facilitate improvements
within the integrated healthcare model. In order to realize DHS benefits, developing an integrated
healthcare system that promotes greater connection, collaboration and communication is essential.
A standardized framework would assist health policymakers in the development of regulatory, clinical,
and pricing and reimbursement guidelines for digital health solutions in a similar fashion to those that
are already in place (e.g., for both pharmaceuticals and medical devices).
This transfer of funding will:
Leverage the Health Portfolio’s International Health Grants Program (IHGP); and
Provide grant funding to support the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development's
standardized digital health evaluation framework.
Purpose /Objectives
The purpose will be to support the OECD’s project to:
Strengthen the utilization of digital health technology (DHT) through the creation of a
common/standardized framework, leveraging international evidence and best practices to strengthen
and transform current health public systems.
Establish consistent assessing DHT research, regulatory, and implementation practices that will allow for
comparable data and interoperability across countries.
Develop a set of specific evidence standards for DHTs to facilitate effective and equitable evaluation
strategies and reimbursement decisions.
Expected Results
The OECD research group will aim to create a framework that:
Explores gaps in current regulations and identify challenges and opportunities of current digital health
evaluation frameworks that hinder the integration of DHTs;
Establishes a robust digital health assessment methodology with an identification of the necessary
criteria for evaluating DHTs and what constitutes suitable evidence;
Supports investment decisions in DHTs through the creation of a DHT-specific and comprehensive health
technology assessment (HTA) process that establishes a context dependent reimbursement model for
the adoption of clinically effective and value-based DHTs; and
Supports the creation of universal digital health interoperability standards to address the issues in the
lack of interoperability as critical barrier for the adoption of digital health technologies
Voted
$40,000
Statutory
$0
Name
Transfer to the Treasury Board Secretariat for the OCG Policy on Transfer Payments Innovation Agenda
($15,000)
Key Messages
The Policy on Transfer Payments Renewal and Innovation Agenda aims to improve the design and
delivery of grants and contributions (G&Cs) in the federal government.
The Office Comptroller General (OCG) needs to build upon its existing capacity to lead the Innovation
Agenda, in consultation and collaboration with other departments and agencies.
PHAC will contribute $165,000 over the next 4 years.
The Innovation Agenda includes various components such as facilitating consultation, convening forums,
creating a toolkit, proposing options, and exploring feasibility.
Purpose /Objectives
The OCG and the transfer payment community will work together on the Innovation Agenda for the
Policy on Transfer Payments, which will be funded by the largest G&Cs delivery departments.
Expected Results
These collaborations could lead to collective efficiencies in procurement, staffing, administration,
reporting, auditing, and process optimization for GoC systems.
Voted
($15,000)
Statutory
$0
Name
Transfer to the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to support strengthening domestic
antimicrobial resistance governance in the agriculture sectors
($200,000)
Key Messages
The Pan-Canadian Action Plan on AMR (PCAP) provides a 5-year roadmap (2023-2027) for collective
action to address the growing public health threat of AMR across 5 pillars – Research and Innovation;
Surveillance; Stewardship, Infection Prevention and Control; and, Leadership.
The PCAP is a shared commitment between federal/provincial/territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health and
Agriculture.
Increased coordination and collaboration across One Health sections (human health, animal health and
their shared environment) is needed to advance PCAP priority actions.
This transfer will support the inclusion of animal and agriculture partners in PCAP governance and to
deliver on priority actions.
Purpose /Objectives
To strengthen domestic governance in the agriculture sectors to support the implementation of PCAP
including:
Establishing a coordinating body to work with partners to establish baselines, goals and measures of
progress, support the development, implementation and promotion of guidelines/standards for
appropriate antimicrobial use (AMU) in animals; and
Supporting the implementation of enhanced infection prevention and control, biosecurity and food
safety protocols.
Expected Results
Expected results include:
A coordinating body is established to work across animal health, agriculture and agri-food sectors;
Detailed plans with deliverables, milestones, accountabilities and timelines to support PCAP
implementation; and
PCAP implementation gaps are identified and prioritized.
Voted
($200,000)
Statutory
$0
Name
Transfer to the Canadian Food Inspection Agency to support an assessment on antimicrobial resistance
and use in food producing animals
($285,000)
Key Messages
The Pan-Canadian Action Plan on AMR (PCAP) provides a 5-year roadmap (2023-2027) for collective
action to address the growing public health threat of AMR across 5 pillars – Research and Innovation;
Surveillance; Stewardship, Infection Prevention and Control; and, Leadership.
The PCAP is a shared commitment between federal/provincial/territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health and
Agriculture.
Increased coordination and collaboration across One Health sections (human health, animal health and
their shared environment) is needed to advance PCAP priority actions.
This transfer will support CFIA to undertake an assessment on antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and
antimicrobial use (AMU) in food producing animals and summarize, including perspectives of food
producers and veterinary professionals, as well as the consumer perspective (awareness/expectations)
on AMR/AMU in food producing animals.
Purpose /Objectives
The purpose of this funding is to:
Support the implementation of PCAP, and to have a better understanding of how AMR in food producing
animals impacts human health, and an understanding of what approaches or interventions could
improve prudent use of antimicrobials in food producing animals within the Canadian context are
needed; and
For CFIA to undertake an assessment and summarize what is currently known about how AMR in food
producing animals impacts human health, and assessment of best practices to inform the kinds of
changes needed to make a significant difference to further enhance the prudent use of antimicrobials (in
particular, medically important antimicrobials) in food-producing animals, and how those changes might
be systemically achieved in the Canadian context.
Expected Results
Expected results include:
Increased knowledge of the impacts of exposure to AMR in enteric/foodborne pathogens on human
health and meaningful interventions to enhance the responsible use of antimicrobials in food-producing
animals within the Canadian context;
Understanding of consumer and stakeholder perceptions of antimicrobial use in food-producing animals
and opportunities to strengthen public education and promote antimicrobial stewardship; and,
Provision of additional evidence and identification of opportunities to take further action under PCAP.
This may include information to support the development of baselines and goals for reduction of AMU in
animals.
Voted
($285,000)
Statutory
$0
Name
Transfer to the Department of Employment and Social Development to support activities related to the
Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Transformation Initiative
($890,149)
Key Messages
Budget 2021 announced further incremental funding increases for Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and
Northern Communities (AHSUNC) Program over the next five years (2021-22 to 2025-26) to better
support Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care (IELCC) in urban and northern communities. The
allocation of this funding will be determined by the National Aboriginal Head Start Council (NAHSC), in
consultation with other regional bodies.
This horizontal initiative is led by Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) and includes
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) and Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada
(CIRNAC).
To support this work, the partners have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that sets out
the terms and conditions for the transfer of funds between ESDC, PHAC and ISC for the IELCC
Transformation Initiative.
Purpose /Objectives
The Agency received dedicated funding for AHSUNC in anticipation of funding decisions to be made by
Regional Partnership Tables for Alberta, Quebec and the Atlantic. Funding decisions have now been
made by Indigenous recipients and an amount of $890,149 was not allocated to the AHSUNC program.
Based on the MOU, funds should be returned to ESDC so that they can be consolidated and potentially
reprofiled into the next fiscal year.
The funds being transferred represent a return of funding under the MOU to implement decisions made
by Indigenous partners (Alberta, Quebec and Atlantic) in Fall 2023.
Expected Results
As noted in the IELCC Framework and through the Transformation Initiative, it is expected that AHSUNC
will be Indigenous-led and aligned with the principles of Indigenous reconciliation.
Voted
($890,149)
Statutory
$0
Total Transfers
($600,149)
Statutory
$0
INTERNAL REALLOCATIONS
Name
Items
Internal reallocation of resources for the development of national antimicrobial resistance prescribing
guidelines and to address sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections in prisons and the increasing
rates of syphilis
Key Messages
This reallocation from operating to contributions will be used to fund activities for the following:
Sexually transmitted blood-borne infections (STBBI) project;
Antimicrobial stewardship initiatives as per the Pan-Canadian Action Plan for AMR; and
To address increasing rates of syphilis.
Purpose /Objectives
This is a conversion of $2,000,000 from Operating to Contributions.
Expected Results
The initiatives this funding will allow for include;
Improved STBBI screening and linkage to care for people in the prison environment through partnerships
with community organizations and peer support workers;
Development of a series of 25 guidelines leveraging the WHO Aware system and an advanced digital
solution to a wider distribution of these guidelines to health professionals; and
Mobilizing knowledge to address increasing rates of syphilis.
Voted
$0
Statutory
$0
Total Vote Transfers
Voted
$0
Statutory
$0
Name
Items
TOTAL SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES ‘C’
Total: $11,670,670
Key Messages (3-5 bullets max.)
For Supplementary Estimates (C), the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) has an increase of $11.7
million for the following:
$11.5 million in Voted Appropriations, which includes $11.2 million in new funding and $0.3 million for
transfers from other Government departments.
$0.2 million in statutory appropriations for employee benefit plans.
Purpose /Objectives
--
Expected Results
--
Voted
$11,485,380
Statutory
$185,290
Funding for the Foot-and-Mouth Disease (FMD) Vaccine Bank for Canada (Budget 2023)
Total: $11,385,670
Key Messages (3-5 bullets max.)
The CFIA is seeking funding of $57.5M over five years, starting in 2023-24, with $5.6 million ongoing, to
establish an FMD vaccine bank for Canada, and to develop FMD response plans.
Purpose /Objectives
Establish an FMD vaccine bank for Canada, and develop FMD response plans.
Expected Results
Vaccine Antigen Concentrates are available to respond to an FMD outbreak in Canada.
Vaccines to prevent the spread of FMD in Canada are effective.
FMD emergency response plans are effective.
In the event of an outbreak:
Ready-to-use vaccines are delivered to the CFIA;
Canada can limit the epidemic duration and spread.
Plant and animal resources are protected from diseases and pests and are safe for Canadians and the
environment.
Voted
$11,200,380
Statutory
$185,290
Transfer from the Public Health Agency of Canada to support an assessment on antimicrobial resistance
(AMR) and use in food producing animals
Total: $285,000
Key Messages (3-5 bullets max.)
Transfer of $285,000 from the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Canadian Food Inspection Agency
to support an assessment on antimicrobial resistance and use in food producing animals.
Purpose /Objectives
Summarize what is currently known about how AMR in food producing animals impacts human health.
Assess best practices in order to inform the kinds of changes needed to make a significant difference to
further enhance the prudent use of antimicrobials (in particular, medically important antimicrobials) in
food-producing animals, including how these changes might be systemically achieved in the Canadian
context.
Expected Results
Conduct a literature review of policy documents and published research and surveillance evidence.
Conduct key informant interviews with FPT government and industry representatives including
producers (farmers) and veterinarians.
Develop international case studies through document review and interviews.
Identify approaches successful in educating the public on AMR in the agri-food sector, including their
impacts on consumer expectations and behaviour.
Identify relevance for Canadian context through stakeholder engagement, in written submissions,
surveys and through virtual sessions.
Develop assessment report for policy-makers based on expert analysis.
Validate report(s) through a peer review process.
Support dissemination of key findings through a series of webinars with a focus on international case
studies.
Voted
$285,000
Statutory
--
CIHR
Funding to support research activities related to health and climate change
Total: $800,000
Transfer from Department of Health
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
This investment will support health research to study critical gaps in climate-health risks and climate-
sensitive health outcomes in Canada.
One-year bridge grants (up to $100K each) will be offered to relevant, highly rated applications
submitted to CIHR’s Fall 2023 Project Grant competition.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
Funded research will contribute to strengthen the evidence to inform climate change and health policies,
actions, and interventions.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
Strengthened evidence base on the impacts of climate change on the health and wellbeing of Canadians.
Evidence generated will support efforts to build climate resilient and low-carbon health systems.
Voted
$800,000
Statutory
0
Funding for the Healthy Youth Initiative
Total: $425,000
Transfer from the Department of Indigenous Services
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
CIHR’s Healthy Youth Initiative aims to support research aligned with youth health and well-being in the
six priority areas outlined in Canada's Youth Policy.
This funding will support distinctions-based research in this area that focuses on First Nations, Inuit,
Métis, and/or Urban Indigenous youth.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
This funding will support distinctions-based research which aims to identify and develop emerging
research areas relevant to at least one of the six priority areas of Canada's Youth Policy.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
Research evidence to enable progress in the six priority areas outlined in Canada's Youth Policy.
Voted
$425,000
Statutory
0
Funding for the administration and operations of the Secretariat on Responsible Conduct of Research
Total: $49,540
Transfer from CIHR to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council and the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
This important investment supports the federal research granting agencies’ role in the promotion of the
responsible conduct of research in the institutions that administer federal funding for research.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
For the administrative and financial support for the SRCR, which provides substantive and administrative
support for the Panel on Research Ethics and the Panel on Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR), as
well as to the Agencies with respect to the RCR Framework and the Tri-council Policy Statement.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
The federal granting agencies deliver on the promotion of responsible conduct of research.
Voted
($49,540)
Statutory
0
Funding for the development of a common grants management solution
Total: $156,156
Transfer from CIHR to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
The Tri-Agency Grants Management Solution initiative will modernize the grants management system for
the federal granting agencies to better support applicants, administrators and reviewers during the
grants management lifecycle of the agencies.
This transfer reflects an updated forecast for this project as provided by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
The three federal research granting agencies have embarked on an initiative to modernize their grants
management system to better support applicants, administrators and reviewers during the grants
management lifecycle.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
Upon completion, a more harmonized and integrated approach will provide the research community and
agency staff with a more efficient and user-friendly experience.
Voted
($156,156)
Statutory
0
38. Main Estimates
2024-25 Main Estimates
Health Canada
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
3,919.0
Increases
4,812.5
Decreases
(333.5)
Net Change
4,479.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
8,398.0
% Change This Year over Last Year
114.3%
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
181.2
Increases
129.5
Decreases
(30.1)
Net Change
99.4
2024-25 Main Estimates
280.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
54.9%
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
4,100.2
Increases
4,942.0
Decreases
(363.6)
Net Change
4,578.4
2024-25 Main Estimates
8,678.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
111.7%
Health Canada has a proposed net increase of $4,578.4M in its 2024-25 Main Estimates (from $4,100.2M
in 2023-24 to $8,678.6M in 2024-25).
Increases of $4,941.6M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed TB Submissions increase of $4,813.4M
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians ($2,630.5M)
Dental Care for Canadians and the Interim Canada Dental Benefit ($2,095.0M)
Renewal of the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy ($58.3M)
Strengthening Environmental Protection for a Healthier Canada (support amendments to the Canadian
Environmental Protection Act, 1999) ($10.1M)
Building a world-class health data system for Canadians ($8.5M)
Canada's National Adaptation Strategy ($7.8M)
Action Plan for Official Languages 2023-2028: Protection-Promotion-Collaboration ($3.2M)
Funding Level Increases [$8.4M]
Terry Fox Research Institute and Ovarian Cancer Canada in support of cancer research ($8.4M)
Other [$119.8M]
Funding for newly signed collective agreements ($106.1M)
Various other increases under $2.0M (totalling $9.4M)
Transfer from the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food for the delivery of the Minor Use Pesticide
Program under the Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership ($4.3M)
Decreases of $233.9M (including Statutory)
Sunset [$235.0M]
Improve mental health supports and services (Wellness Together Canada) ($69.9M)
Canada’s Chemicals Management Regime ($61.7M)
Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office ($24.5M)
Strengthening the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process ($17.8M)
Bringing Innovation to Regulations ($13.3M)
National Standards on Mental Health ($12.7M)
Address anti-Indigenous racism in health care ($9.6M)
Construction of plasma collection sites ($9.2M)
Implementation of greening initiatives ($8.3M)
Ensure the ongoing integrity of the Public Service Occupational Health Program ($6.8M)
Funding Level Decrease [$90.4M]
Addressing the Opioid Crisis and Substance Use and Addictions Program (as a result of approved
reprofiles) ($64.3M)
Support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services ($13.5M)
Canada Brain Research Fund Program (as a result of an approved reprofile) ($8.2M)
Renewal of the federal framework for the legalization and regulation of Cannabis in Canada ($4.4M)
Other [$38.9M]
Refocusing Government Spending ($20.7M)
Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plans ($13.7M)
Various other decreases under $2.0M ($4.5M)
Statutory Appropriations - Net funding increase of $99.4M relates mainly to the Canada Dental Benefit
Plan and employee benefits plan adjustments.
For information purposes, the 2024-25 Main Estimates total statutory includes the new Canadian Dental
Benefit Plan of $100.2M and a statutory revenue forecast of $51.5M for the internal shared services
partnership between Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada which is in line with the
previous year.
Note: Items related to Minister Saks are highlighted in green
Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
HC
CONTRIBUTIONS
Substance Use and Addictions Program
Purpose /Objectives
The Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides funding for a wide range of evidence-
informed and innovative substance use prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across
Canada at the community, regional and national levels. These public education, capacity building,
research, best practices/standards and service delivery initiatives target a range of substances, including
opioids, stimulants, cannabis, alcohol, tobacco and vaping products.
Expected Results
Health Canada provides contribution funding through SUAP in support of the Canadian Drug and
Substance Strategy, as well as the delivery of 3 of the Department’s Programs: Tobacco Control,
Controlled Substances, and Cannabis.
In addition to funding many community, regional and national organizations, Health Canada also
provides approximately $10 million SUAP funding annually to the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and
Addiction to achieve national impact through partnerships, and for knowledge mobilization, capacity
building and training for targeted groups/populations in the areas of stigma reduction, workforce
competencies, alcohol, cannabis, and the intersections between substance use and mental health.
It is expected that through these investments, Canadians and stakeholders will have access to evidence-
based information on substance use and increased availability of harm reduction and treatment services.
In the longer-term, this will lead to improved knowledge and skills and will help Canadians make
informed decisions about their health to reduce risk-taking behavior. These investments may contribute
to reduced negative health impacts experienced by people who use drugs.
2022–23 Expenditures
145,289,504
2023–24 Main Estimates
136,634,149
2024–25 Main Estimates
104,300,573
Mental Health Commission of Canada Contribution Program
Purpose /Objectives
The Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC), an arm's length, not-for-profit organization, was
established in March 2007 with a 10-year mandate to improve health and social outcomes for people
and their families living with mental illness. Between 2007 and 2017, the Government of Canada
invested $130 million in the MHCC through a grant, to develop a mental health strategy for Canada,
conduct an anti-stigma campaign, and create a knowledge exchange centre. In 2016, the MHCC's
mandate was renewed for a 10-year period, from 2017-18 to 2026-27, to advance work on mental health
priorities in 4 areas: the integration of mental health and substance use (in collaboration with the
Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addictions), suicide prevention, priority populations, and
engagement with diverse stakeholders.
Expected Results
The MHCC is expected to contribute to the improved mental health and well-being of Canadians, notably
in the areas of suicide prevention, stigma reduction, population-based initiatives, and mental health and
substance use integration. This will be done through developing and disseminating knowledge products,
establishing collaborative partnerships, and providing evidence-based trainings.
A variety of learning materials (online modules, training, videos, etc.) will be targeted for children and
youth, older adults, Indigenous communities, and underserved and marginalized populations. In
addition, the MHCC will further support the implementation of the National Standard for Psychological
Health and Safety in the Workplace and the National Standard for Mental Health and Well-Being of Post-
Secondary Students.
2022–23 Expenditures
14,250,000
2023–24 Main Estimates
14,250,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
14,250,000
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENTS
Contributions to Provinces and Territories for Shared Health Priorities
Purpose /Objectives
Through new investments outlined in Budget 2023 associated with the Working Together to Improve
Health Care for Canadians Plan, this Program was expanded to support provinces and territories in
addressing the following shared health priorities:
Expanding access to family health services, including in rural and remote areas.
Supporting health workers and reducing backlogs for health services such as surgeries and diagnostics.
Improving access to quality mental health, substance use, and addictions services.
Modernizing the health care system with standardized information and digital tools so health care
providers and patients have access to electronic health information.
Helping Canadians age with dignity, closer to home, by supporting efforts to improve access to home and
community care, and safe long-term care.
The Plan includes $25 billion over 10 years (2023-24 to 2032-33) in bilateral funding to support the first 4
shared health priorities, which will be transferred to provinces and territories through the Working
Together agreements. These agreements also include the remaining $2.4 billion of $5 billion from Budget
2017 to improve access to mental health and addictions services by supporting one or more of the areas
of action outlined in the August 2017 Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
Health Canada will also provide provinces and territories with $3 billion over 5 years through Aging with
Dignity agreements to support them in helping Canadians age with dignity close to home. Provinces and
territories will:
Apply standards of care in long-term care facilities.
Help support workforce stability, including wage top-ups and improvements to workplace conditions.
The Aging with Dignity agreements also include the remaining $2.4 billion from the Budget 2017
commitment of $6 billion over 10 years to advance the priorities associated with home and community
care in the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
Expected Results
It is expected that through these investments, Canadians will experience tangible improvements in
access to high-quality family health services (i.e., family doctor, or nurse practitioner); timely, equitable,
and high-quality mental health and substance use services, with a focus on youth; interoperable digital
tools and data; home and community care, and palliative care services. Canadians will also receive
improved long-term care by ensuring consistent standards are applied, strengthening enforcement and
oversight, and supporting initiatives to enhance workforce stability.
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
-
2024–25 Main Estimates
4,300,310,000
Health Canada’s Main Estimates Summary
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians
Description
Funding to Support the four shared health priorities: Renew the Territorial Health Investment Fund in
recognition of medical travel and the additional cost of delivering health care in the territories; support
work with provinces and territories to develop new health data indicators; and, advance digital health
tools and an interoperability roadmap. (+$2,630.5M)
$2,630.5M received in-year (SEA) in 2023-24
Mental Health is contained in two of the four pillars of this item
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
2,630.5
Net Change (in millions)
2,630.5
Renewal of the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy
Description
Funding to improve access to community-based substance use services and supports; amend legislation
and create new regulations to streamline approvals for harm reduction services; support data collection
and analysis; and target enforcement efforts to disrupt the toxic illegal drug supply. (+$58.3M)
$31.7M received in-year (SEB) in 2023-24
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
58.3
Net Change (in millions)
58.3
Sunset - Decreases
Improve mental health supports and services (Wellness Together Canada)
Description
Funding in 2023-24 to sustain improved access to mental health services with the Wellness Together
Canada portal, as well as to help Canadians who are experiencing mental health or substance use issues.
This item sunsets in 2023-24 and has not been renewed for 2024-25
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
69.9
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
Net Change (in millions)
(69.9)
National Standards on Mental Health
Description
Funding of $12.7M was reprofiled from 2021-22 to 2023-24 so that contractual work being done by the
Standards Council of Canada can continue in 2023-24. Initial standards deliverables will be complete in
March 2023 in order to proceed to the next phase of testing.
This item sunsets in 2023-24 and has not been renewed for 2024-25
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
12.7
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
0.0
Net Change (in millions)
(12.7)
Funding Level Decreases
Addressing the Opioid Crisis and Substance Use and Addictions Program (as a result of approved
reprofiles)
Description
Overall net funding level decrease due to the following:
Sunset for Budget 2021 Addressing the opioids crisis and problematic substance use (-$32.2M)
Sunset for Budget 2019 The Drug Overdose Crisis in Canada (-$17.0M)
Sunset for the 2020 FES Addressing the opioids crisis (-$8.3M)
Decrease for Budget 2022 Addressing the opioids crisis and problematic substance use (-$6.4M)
Decrease for the Substance Use and Addictions Program reprofile (-$0.3M)
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
105.7
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
41.4
Net Change (in millions)
(64.3)
2024-25 Main Estimates
Public Health Agency of Canada
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
4,157.7
Increases
655.5
Decreases
-3,013.1
Net Change
-2,357.6
Net Change
1,800.1
% Change This Year over Last Year
(43%)
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
59.1
Increases
33.9
Decreases
-24.6
Net Change
9.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
68.4
% Change This Year over Last Year
116%
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
4,216.8
Increases
689.4
Decreases
-3,037.7
Net Change
-2,348.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
1,868.5
Note: Figures may not add up due to rounding.
Public Health Agency of Canada has a proposed total net decrease of $2,348.3M in its 2024-25 Main
Estimates (from $4,216.8M in 2023-24 to $1,868.5M in 2024-25). However, please note, although the
table above speaks to the total variances in the Agency’s Main Estimates, the items listed below
specifically pertain to mental health funding.
Increase of $50.3M (excluding Statutory)
Funding to support Canada’s three-digit suicide prevention and emotional distress line ($50.3M); and
Decrease of $76.9M (excluding Statutory)
Funding for mental health of those affected by COVID-19 (-$76.9M).
Summary of Transfer Payment Program Variances related to Mental Health Funding
PHAC
Grants
Grants to individuals and organizations in support of health promotion projects in the areas of building
community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and partnership
building/intersectoral collaboration
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial assistance provided through grants that support the Public
Health Agency of Canada's (PHAC) interest in promoting population health and disease and injury
prevention.
The goal of Promotion of Population Health Grants is to increase the capacity of individuals and
communities to maintain and improve their health.
Explanation of Variances relating to Mental Health Items
($22M) decrease in funding for distress centres due to sunset in 23-24
The purpose of this funding was to support the ongoing surge in demand faced by distress centres, at
the same time that the sector is experiencing challenges in recruiting and retaining responders. The
distress centres support the needs of those experiencing mental health crisis and distress.
($11M) decrease in funding for mental health of those affected by COVID-19 due to sunset in 23-24
This funding was to support enhanced programming to address the mental health needs of populations
most affected by the pandemic, including youth, older adults, First Nations, Inuit, Métis, Black and other
racialized populations, health care workers and essential service providers.
2022-23 Expenditures
390,416
2023-24 Main Estimates
33,000,000
2024-25 Main Estimates
0
Main Estimates Variance
(33,000,000)
Contributions
Contributions to individuals and organizations to support health promotion projects in the areas of
building community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and partnership
building/intersectoral collaboration
Purpose of the Class
These Terms and Conditions apply to financial assistance provided through contributions that support
the Public Health Agency of Canada's (PHAC) interest in promoting population health and disease and
injury prevention.
The goal of Promotion of Population Health Contributions is to increase the capacity of individuals and
communities to maintain and improve their health.
Explanation of Variances relating to Mental Health Items
$50.3M in new funding for the 9-8-8 suicide prevention line will be received in 24-25
This 3-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress will provide Canadians with safe, high
quality, equitable, accessible and evidence-based crisis support, 24/7/365.
($43.0M) decrease in funding for mental health of those affected by COVID-19 in 24-25
This funding supports enhanced programming to address the mental health needs of populations most
affected by the pandemic, including youth, older adults, Inuit, Metis, Black and other racialized
populations, healthcare workers and essential service providers.
2022-23 Expenditures
92,048,468
2023-24 Main Estimates
47,953,043
2024-25 Main Estimates
55,300,000
Main Estimates Variance
7,346,957
Note: Items not related to mental health for these G&C classes are not included in this table
Public Health Agency of Canada’s Main Estimates Overview
Initiative
Increase – Mental Health
Funding for 9-8-8 suicide prevention
Description
Budget 2023 announced funding of $143.4M over three years to support the operations of the 9-8-8 line
for suicide prevention and emotional distress which would provide Canadians with safe, high quality,
equitable, accessible and evidence-based crisis support, 24/7/365, through call or text, in English and
French.
PHAC will administer 9-8-8 funding through a contribution agreement with Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, which will build capacity by supporting the onboarding of new independent crisis lines to
the 9-8-8 responder network.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
0
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
50.3
Net Change (in millions)
50.3
Initiative
Decrease – Mental Health
Funding to improve mental health supports and services to help those most affected by COVID-19 and
distress centres
Description
Budget 2021 announced funding to address the mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This funding includes $100 million over three years for mental health promotion and mental illness
prevention for those most affected, and $50 million over two years to address PTSD and trauma in
frontline and essential workers and others who are disproportionately affected.
It also includes $3 million over two years to develop indicators to monitor the impact of national mental
health service standards and set up data collection and data infrastructure for standards reporting.
Part of the funding is also to help to stabilize distress centres during the pandemic and pandemic
recovery phase as they continue to experience a surge in demand for mental health crisis calls.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
81.9
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.0
Net Change (in millions)
(76.9)
Please Note: values exclude statutory
2024-25 Main Estimates
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
691.4
Increases
85.0
Decreases
66.7
Net Change
18.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
709.7
% Change This Year over Last Year
2.6%
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
150.7
Increases
12.7
Decreases
16.8
Net Change
(4.1)
2024-25 Main Estimates
146.6
% Change This Year over Last Year
(2.7%)
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
842.1
Increases
97.7
Decreases
83.5
Net Change
14.2
2024-25 Main Estimates
856.3
% Change This Year over Last Year
1.7%
Note: Figures may not add due to rounding.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency has a proposed net increase of $14.2M in its 2024-25 Main Estimates
(from $842.1M in 2023-24 to $856.3M in 2024-25).
Increases of $97.7M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed Treasury Board Submissions [$50.2M]
Funding for the renewal of the Daily Shift Inspection Presence program ($15.6M)
Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures ($14.2M)
Funding to establish a foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) vaccine bank for Canada, and to develop FMD
response plans ($11.4M)
Funding to secure market access for the Canadian agricultural sector ($5.8M)
Funding to implement Canadaʼs Indo-Pacific Strategy ($3.2M)
Funding Level Increases [$1.6M]
Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade of regulated
animals other than livestock ($1.4M)
Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations
($0.2M)
Other [$45.9M]
Funding for Collective Bargaining ($40.7M)
Transfer from the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to deliver initiatives related to market access
under the Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership ($5.2M)
Decreases of $83.5M (including Statutory)
Funding Level Decreases [$61.8M]
Funding to maintain programming which mitigates the public health, animal health and economic risks
related to Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy ($35.3M)
Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia ($9.6M)
Funding to address the current Potato Wart crisis in Prince Edward Island ($5.7M)
Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant, and animal products ($5.2M)
Funding for building a post pandemic agile workforce and to support long-term digital transformation
($4.0M)
Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine fever ($1.9M)
Funding of the Innovative Solution Canada Grant Reprofile (from 2021-22) ($0.1M)
Other [$21.7M]
Refocusing Government Spending ($12.4M)
Employee Benefit Plan (EBP) adjustments ($7.9M)
Transfer to Global Affairs Canada for staff on missions abroad ($0.6M)
Transfer to Health Canada for Improving Food Safety ($0.6M)
Transfer to Treasury Board Secretariat for the Organizational Project Management Capacity Assessment
and Project Complexity and Risk Assessment ($0.2M)
Statutory Appropriations
A net funding decrease of $4.1M in Statutory authorities mainly relates to EBP adjustments.
For information purposes, Statutory authorities included in the 2024-25 Main Estimates consists of
Statutory revenue of $53.0M, Statutory compensation payments of $12.5M, and EBP of $81.1M.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2024-25 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
GRANTS
Innovative Solutions Canada (ISC)
Purpose /Objectives
The ISC program supports the generation of new and unique intellectual property (IP) stimulation of
Research and Development collaborations, and growth of small businesses in the Canadian innovation
ecosystem.
Expected Results
CFIA's Innovative Solutions Canada grants will promote the development of innovative approaches to
improve sector outcomes.
2022–23 Expenditures
850,000
2023–24 Main Estimates
400,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
1,049,999
Original amount:
284,167 Plus transfer from Operating to Grants in 2024-25: 765,832
CONTRIBUTIONS
Federal Assistance Program (FAP)
Purpose /Objectives
The FAP supports projects and initiatives that advance CFIA's strategic outcome of a safe and accessible
food supply and plant and animal resource base.
Expected Results
The expected results include:
a. scientific and technical knowledge is advanced and/or enhanced;
b. individual knowledge and skills are developed and/or improved;
c. international collaborations are expanded and/or strengthened; and
d. organizations or initiatives are established or sustained.
2022–23 Expenditures
568,541
2023–24 Main Estimates
600,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
600,000
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENTS
Compensation Payments
Purpose /Objectives
Compensate Canadians, in accordance with the appropriate regulations, for plants or animals ordered
destroyed for the purpose of disease control.
Expected Results
In accordance with the Health of Animals Act and the Plant Protection Act, owners and/or producers will
be compensated for ordered destruction of animals or plants for the purpose of disease control.
Compensation will be provided according to the market value of the animals or plants.
2022–23 Expenditures
119,382,097
2023–24 Main Estimates
12,500,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
12,500,000
Canadian Food Inspection Agency Main Estimates Summary
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Funding for the renewal of the Daily Shift Inspection Presence program
Description
The CFIA received Treasury Board (TB) approval for $15.6M in ongoing funding, beginning in 2023-24, to
maintain the Daily Shift Inspection Presence Program in all federal meat processing establishments
identified in a licence and delivered under the Safe Food for Canadians Act (SFC licence), to meet the
United States inspection frequency requirement to maintain market access. This funding will allow the
Agency to continue to provide the presence of an inspector once every 12 hours of operation in all
federal meat processing establishments, as well as provide continuous export opportunities for all
establishments, while avoiding the creation of a two-tiered meat inspection system in Canada.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
15.6
Net Change
15.6
Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for $31.4M in funding over two years (2023-24 to 2024-25), including
$14.2M in 2024-25, to ensure food safety through the continuation of risk-based compliance verification
of domestic and import food sectors in three key areas of work: improving risk intelligence and oversight,
offshore preventative activities, and improving stakeholder compliance.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
14.2
Net Change
14.2
Funding to establish a foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) vaccine bank for Canada, and to develop FMD
response plans
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for $57.5M in funding over five years, starting in 2023-24, with $5.6M
ongoing, to establish an FMD vaccine bank for Canada and to develop FMD response plans. The
Canadian FMD vaccine bank will serve as a strategic reserve of FMD vaccine antigen concentrate to
enable emergency vaccination in response to large FMD outbreaks affecting susceptible species of
Canada’s livestock industry (i.e. cloven-hoofed animals). The Government will also seek a cost-sharing
arrangement with provinces and territories.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
11.4
Net Change
11.4
Funding to secure market access for the Canadian agricultural sector
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for $12.5M in funding over two years (2023-24 to 2024-25), including
$5.8M in 2024-25, for securing market access for the agricultural sector. The overall objective is to
enable the CFIA to continue to maintain and expand market access for Canadian agriculture, agri-food,
seafood, and forestry products exported to global markets and facilitate the importation of products into
Canada.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
5.8
Net Change
5.8
Funding to implement Canadaʼs Indo-Pacific Strategy
Description
Global Affairs Canada (the Strategy lead), along with partner departments and agencies, received access
to new funding earmarked in the fiscal framework, starting in 2023-24, to implement Canada’s Indo-
Pacific Strategy. An off-cycle funding decision provided $2.26B over five years (starting in FY 2023-24)
and $175.4M per year ongoing in support of five objectives that will aim to: 1) promote peace,
resilience, and security; 2) expand trade, investment, and supply chain resilience; 3) invest and connect
in people; 4) build a sustainable and green future; and 5) ensure Canada’s role as an active and engaged
partner to the region.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
3.2
Net Change
3.2
Funding Level Increases
Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade of regulated
animals other than livestock
Description
The CFIA received TB approval to access $20.5M over four years (2022-23 to 2025-26) to enable the
Agency to effectively respond to the increasing and significant health risks posed by the growth of legal
and illegal pet trade.
2023-24 Main Estimates
4.2
2024-25 Main Estimates
5.6
Net Change
1.4
Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations
Description
The CFIA received TB approval for funding of $10.0M over nine years and $300K ongoing, as approved in
Budget 2022, to support implementation of compliance and enforcement of new amendments to the
Food and Drug Regulations, also known as the Front of Package amendments, which include other
amendments on vitamin D fortification, labelling for aspartame, and prohibition of partially
hydrogenated oils. These regulations came into effect in July 2022 with a transition period ending on
December 31, 2025. Funding will be used to develop compliance promotion and enforcement strategies,
prepare guidance for industry, and training for inspectors. Ongoing funding will support long-term
compliance and enforcement activities, including response to complaints and inspections.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.8
2024-25 Main Estimates
1.0
Net Change
0.2
Other - Increases
Funding for Collective Bargaining
Description
A total increase of $40.7M in 2024-25 related to collective agreement funding to be received by the
Agency.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
40.7
Net Change
40.7
Transfer from the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to deliver initiatives related to market access
under the Sustainable Canadian Agricultural Partnership
Description
Transfer from Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC) to the CFIA for the Sustainable Canadian
Agricultural Partnership initiative. The Sustainable Agricultural Partnership initiative is a five-year, $3.5B
investment by federal, provincial, and territorial governments aimed at strengthening the agriculture,
agri-food, and agri-based products sector. The objective of the CFIA’s market access work through this
funding is to ensure the Agency is able to conduct its critical functions associated with administering and
enforcing legislation related to the import and export of food, animal, and plant products.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
5.2
Net Change
5.2
Funding Level Decreases
Funding to maintain programming which mitigates the public health, animal health and economic risks
related to Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE)
Description
BSE programming was first implemented in 2003. As announced in Budget 2019, the program was
renewed as a sunsetter for five years with funding of $35.3M per year from 2019-20 to 2023-24
allocated to the CFIA, and about $2M per year to Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of
Canada.
2023-24 Main Estimates
35.3
2024-25 Main Estimates
0.0
Net Change
(35.3)
Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia
Description
As part of the federal government’s commitment to establishing and maintaining modern federal science
infrastructure, Budget 2017 committed $80.0M over five years (2019-20 to 2024-25) to replace the
Sidney Centre for Plant Health with a new, world class plant health research facility to help support the
safety of Canada’s agriculture and agri-food sector while facilitating trade and economic growth that
benefits Canadians. The new, world-class Centre for Plant Health will support the science outcomes
detailed in the Federal Science and Technology Infrastructure Initiative (FSTII), help to set the stage for
portfolio management of scientific assets and infrastructure, and implement IM/IT solutions to support
federal scientists in their important work.
2023-24 Main Estimates
29.7
2024-25 Main Estimates
20.1
Net Change
(9.6)
Funding to address the current potato wart crisis in Prince Edward Island
Description
The CFIA received a total of $11.3M in funding over two years ($5.7M in 2022-23 and $5.6M in 2023-24)
to address the current potato wart crisis in Prince Edward Island (PEI), develop operational capacity,
respond to international market pressures, and establish a science-based approach that will minimize
further long-term spread within and outside PEI, and protect market access.
2023-24 Main Estimates
5.7
2024-25 Main Estimates
0.0
Net Change
(5.7)
Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant, and animal products
Description
Budget 2019 announced funding of $25.1M over 5 years ($2.4M in 2019-20, $5.7M in 2020-21, $6.3M in
2021-22, $5.5M in 2022-23, and $5.2M in 2023-24) for the CFIA to continue digitizing its export
certification activities. This is in line with the Government’s commitment to providing Canadians with
reliable, accessible, and secure services that are seamless and digitally enabled. Through this proposal,
the CFIA aimed to advance the replacement of its paper-based system for issuing export certificates with
digital tools to allow Canadian exporters to apply for and receive certificates online. This funding enabled
the CFIA to further digitize transactions with its regulated parties and foreign competent authorities
through the Digital Service Delivery Platform.
2023-24 Main Estimates
5.2
2024-25 Main Estimates
0.0
Net Change
(5.2)
Funding for building a post pandemic agile workforce and to support long-term digital transformation
Description
The CFIA has received funding of $61.7M over three years (2022-23 to 2024-25), as approved in Budget
2022, to prepare for the post-pandemic operating environment. Its aim is to help build an agile
workforce and support longer-term digital transformation by: 1) upskilling inspectors on essential
training that was previously unavailable to them due to COVID-19 restrictions; 2) addressing deferred
maintenance for digital services; and 3) examining opportunities for virtual inspection.
2023-24 Main Estimates
21.9
2024-25 Main Estimates
17.9
Net Change
(4.0)
Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine fever
Description
AAFC, the CFIA, and the Canadian Border Services Agency have received funding of $45.3M over three
years (2022-23 to 2024-25) to support near-term actions for the prevention, preparedness, and
anticipatory trade continuity response initiatives to prevent the entry of African swine fever into Canada.
The CFIA total ask over the duration of the funding proposal is $18.9M.
2023-24 Main Estimates
7.7
2024-25 Main Estimates
5.8
Net Change
(1.9)
Funding of the Innovative Solution Canada (ISC) Grant Reprofile (from 2021-22)
Description
CFIA received grant authority under the ISC grant program Terms and Conditions along with 19 other
federal organizations to support small business innovations through posting online challenges.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.4
2024-25 Main Estimates
0.3 (excludes transfer in 2024-25 of 0.8 from Operating to Grants)
Net Change
(0.1)
Other - Decreases
Refocusing Government Spending
Description
In Budget 2022, the Government announced the launch of a comprehensive Strategic Policy Review with
the objective of generating savings of $6.0B from 2024-25 to 2026-27 and $3.0B annually by 2026-27.
Budget 2023 augments these commitments to achieve ongoing savings of $4.5B annually by 2026-27.
Budget 2023 announced a reduction of $500M to organizations’ travel budgets and spending on
professional services starting in 2023-24, and ongoing savings of $1.7B annually by 2024-25. The CFIA
will reduce spending by $12.4M in 2024-25, $18.3M in 2025-26, and $26.5M in 2026-27 and ongoing.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(12.4)
Net Change
(12.4)
Employee Benefit Plan (EBP) adjustments
Description
The Annual Reference Level Update Employee Benefit Plan rate was decreased by 1.4%.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(7.9)
Net Change
(7.9)
Transfer to Global Affairs Canada for staff on missions abroad
Description
Transfer to Global Affairs Canada from the CFIA in the amount of $0.6M to adjust funding previously
provided for departmental staff located at missions abroad. The transfer will be on an ongoing basis.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(0.6)
Net Change
(0.6)
Transfer to Health Canada for Improving Food Safety
Description
Transfer from the CFIA to the Department of Health in the amount of $0.6M for ensuring food safety
through the continuation of risk-based compliance verification of domestic and import food sectors.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(0.6)
Net Change
(0.6)
Transfer to Treasury Board Secretariat for the Organizational Project Management Capacity Assessment
(OPMCA) and Project Complexity and Risk Assessment (PCRA)
Description
Transfer from the CFIA to Treasury Board Secretariat in the amount of $0.2M for the OPMCA and PCRA.
Testing and feedback from departments demonstrated that the renewed tools were expected to increase
management utility by providing clearer information on organizational strengths and potential areas for
improvement, and by more effectively integrating OPMCA and PCRA results to better inform project risk
management planning and oversight.
2023-24 Main Estimates
0.0
2024-25 Main Estimates
(0.2)
Net Change
(0.2)
2024-25 Main Estimates
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(in millions $)
Voted
2023-24 Main Estimates
1,342.8 43.2
Increases
(25.2)
Decreases
18.0
Net Change
1,360.8
% Change This Year over Last Year
1.3%
Statutory
2023-24 Main Estimates
8.9
Increases
0.0
Decreases
(0.1)
Net Change
(0.1)
2024-25 Main Estimates
8.8
% Change This Year over Last Year
(1.1%)
Total Budgetary
2023-24 Main Estimates
1,351.7
Increases
43.2
Decreases
(25.3)
Net Change
17.9
2024-25 Main Estimates
1,369.6
CIHR has a proposed net increase of $17.9M in its 2024-25 Main Estimates (from $1,351.7M in 2023-24
to $1,369.6M in 2024-25).
Increases of $43.2M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed TB Submissions increase [ $17.2M]
Funding for building a World-Class Health Data System for Canadians ($9.9M)
Funding for the Canada Excellence Research Chairs ($7.3M)
Funding Level Increases [$16.2M]
Funding for the Canada First Research Excellence Fund ($11.2M)
Funding to reflect the distribution of the Canada Graduate Scholarships ($2.8M)
Funding to learn more about Dementia and Brain Health in Aging ($2.2M)
Other [$9.8M]
Funding for compensation adjustments resulting from collective agreements ($6.4M)
Funding to gather national data on trends in drug use and harms in Canada ($1.5M)
Non-material variances under $1.5M, resulting in a net increase ($1.9M)
Decreases of $25.2M (including Statutory)
Sunset [$19.1M]
Funding for Pediatric Cancer Research ($14.6M)
Funding for Cervical Cancer in Canada ($2.1M)
Funding to address the Opioid crisis ($2.4M)
Other [$6.1M]
Reprofiling of the Clinical Trials Fund ($4.7M)
Refocusing government spending to deliver for Canadians ($1.4M)
Statutory Appropriations - Net funding decrease of $0.1M relates mainly to employee benefits plan
adjustments.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
CIHR
“GRANTS FOR RESEARCH PROJECTS AND PERSONNEL SUPPORT” TRANSFER PAYMENT PROGRAM
World-Class Health Data System for Canadians
Purpose /Objectives
This funding will allow national health data partners to work together to advance a national vision for a
world-class health data system.
$9.9 million in 2024-25, $5.4 million in 2025-26, $5.3 million in 2026-27 and $5.7 million in 2027-28.
Expected Results
Disaggregated data needed to report on the number of youth in Canada with access to Integrated Youth
Services for mental health and substance use will be harmonized and standardized to support further
research, knowledge mobilization and decision making.
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
-
2024–25 Main Estimates
8,800,140
To learn more about Dementia and Brain Health
Purpose /Objectives
As announced in Budget 2022, this new funding ($20 million from 2022-23 to 2026-27) will be used to
ramp up efforts to learn more about dementia and brain health, to improve treatment and outcomes for
persons living with dementia, and to evaluate and address mental health consequences for caregivers
and different models of care.
$1.4 million in 2022-23 (provided through Supps C), $3.1 million in 2023-24, $5.3 million in 2024-25, $5.3
million in 2025-26 and $4.5 million in 2026-27.
Expected Results
Research related to dementia and brain health is increased, improve outcomes for persons living with
dementia and their caregivers.
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
2,480,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
4,650,000
Funding to gather national data on trends in drug use and harms in Canada
Purpose /Objectives
Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) will support a Canada-wide study on
controlled substances that will generate baseline data for substance use on the current situation relating
to controlled substance use in Canada and signal emerging threats.
Total funding transfer from Health Canada to CIHR amounts to $6M over four fiscal years (2024-25 to
2027-28).
Expected Results
Population estimates of the use of controlled substances and related knowledge of trends in Canada are
generated, and knowledge is shared
2022–23 Expenditures
-
2023–24 Main Estimates
-
2024–25 Main Estimates
1,500,000
Pediatric Cancer Research
Purpose /Objectives
This funding is from Budget 2021, which allocated $30M over three years to fund pediatric cancer
research leading to the development of new scientifically proven treatments and cures that can lead to
better outcomes and healthier lives for young patients.
This items sunsets in 2023-24.
Expected Results
Advancements in pediatric cancer research are made that can lead to better outcomes and healthier
lives for young patients.
2022–23 Expenditures
15,702,625
2023–24 Main Estimates
14,087,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
-
Cervical Cancer in Canada
Purpose /Objectives
Funding of $10M was provided over five years, to support research on Human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccination and screening methods to contribute to a reduction of cervical cancer in Canada.
This item sunsets 2023-24.
Expected Results
Contribute to the reduction of cervical cancer in Canada by supporting research on Human
papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination.
2022–23 Expenditures
2,048,605
2023–24 Main Estimates
2,050,169
2024–25 Main Estimates
-
To address the Opioid crisis
Purpose /Objectives
Funding was provided to support research to consolidate and analyze the results of pilot projects that
offer safer alternatives to the illegal supply and their impact on the communities within which they
operate, and increase the evidence base on methamphetamine treatment guidelines and advance
priority research.
This item sunsets in 2023-24, though supplementary funds ($225K) have been transferred from HC to
CIHR in 2024-25.
Expected Results
Pilot projects that offer safer alternatives to the illegal supply and their impact on the communities
within which they operate are analyzed.
Evidence is generated on methamphetamine treatment guidelines.
2022–23 Expenditures
1,845,626
2023–24 Main Estimates
2,300,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
-
Reprofiling of the Clinical Trials Fund
Purpose /Objectives
Funding level decrease due to the re-profile of funds from 2023-24 and 2024-25 to 2025-26 ad 2026-27
to support the final competition for clinical trials projects.
Expected Results
An array of clinical trials phases, designs, and objectives across a broad range of health research areas,
aligning with the priorities of the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy, are supported.
2022–23 Expenditures
65,878,656
2023–24 Main Estimates
74,790,826
2024–25 Main Estimates
71,114,308
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENT PROGRAMS
Canada Excellence Research Chairs Program
Purpose /Objectives
The CERC is a Tri-agency program that is administered by the Tri-agency Institutional Programs
Secretariat, which is housed within the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council and represents
and coordinates the interests of the three federal granting agencies.
This funding, announced in Budget 2022, will support new recruited Chairs in the fields of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics—reinforcing Canada’s competitive advantage as a destination
of choice for world-class researchers.
$78.5 million over 8 fiscal years, starting in 2023-24 ($5.8 million received through SEA). An additional
$2.7 million was transferred from the other councils to CIHR over 7 fiscal years, starting in 2024-25,
recalibrate the authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based proportionately on the
research areas addressed by the successful applications.
Expected Results
New recruited Chairs in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics are supported.
Canada’s competitive advantage as a destination of choice for world-class researchers is reinforced.
2022–23 Expenditures
4,200,000
2023–24 Main Estimates
5,800,000
2024–25 Main Estimates
13,137,901
Canada Graduate Scholarships
Purpose /Objectives
The CGS program provides special recognition and financial support to students who are pursuing
masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada.
The increase is mainly the result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate Scholarships
allocations within the program, between the three granting agencies, to re-align with the research
landscape.
Expected Results
Students who are pursuing masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada are
recognized and supported financially.
Re-align the allocation of funding amongst the three granting agencies with the research landscape.
2022–23 Expenditures
36,226,076
2023–24 Main Estimates
39,047,500
2024–25 Main Estimates
41,847,500
Canada First Research Excellence Fund
Purpose /Objectives
The key objective of the CFREF is to help competitively selected Canadian postsecondary institutions
turn their key strengths into world-leading capabilities.
The Tri-Agency Steering Committee approved the results and integrity of the review process for the third
CFREF competition in February 2023. The purpose of this transfer is to recalibrate the authorities
appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based proportionately on the research areas addressed by the
successful applications. For CIHR, this represents an additional $64.8M over 6 years starting in 2024-25.
Expected Results
Key strengths of Canadian postsecondary institutions turn into world-leading capabilities.
Authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR are based proportionately on the research areas
addressed by the successful applications.
2022–23 Expenditures
38,748,944
2023–24 Main Estimates
47,227,134
2024–25 Main Estimates
58,407,137
Canadian Institutes of Health Research Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Building a World-Class Health Data System for Canadians
Description
Funding for Health Canada, Statistics Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, and the
Canadian Institute for Health Information ($194 million over five years, including $26.4 million to CIHR),
for national health data partners to work together to advance a national vision for a world-class health
data system.
$9.9 million in 2024-25, $5.4 million in 2025-26, $5.3 million in 2026-27 and $5.7 million in 2027-28.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
9.9
Net Change (in millions)
9.9
Canada Excellence Research Chairs (CERC)
Description
Funding to support new Chairs in the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics—
reinforcing Canada’s competitive advantage as a destination of choice for world-class researchers
(announced in Budget 2022).
The CERC is a Tri-agency program that is administered by the Tri-agency Institutional Programs
Secretariat (TIPS), which is housed within the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council and
represents and coordinates the interests of the three federal granting agencies.
$78.5 million over 8 fiscal years, starting in 2023-24 ($5.8 million received through Supplementary
Estimates A). An additional $2.7 million was transferred from the other councils to CIHR over 7 fiscal
years, starting in 2024-25, recalibrate the authorities appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based
proportionately on the research areas addressed by the successful applications.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.8
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
13.1
Net Change (in millions)
7.3
Funding Level Increases
Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF)
Description
The key objective of the CFREF is to help competitively selected Canadian postsecondary institutions
turn their key strengths into world-leading capabilities.
The Tri-Agency Steering Committee approved the results and integrity of the review process for the third
CFREF competition in February 2023. purpose of this transfer is to recalibrate the authorities
appropriated to SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR based proportionately on the research areas addressed by the
successful applications. For CIHR, this represents an additional $64.8M over 6 years starting in 2024-25.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
47.2
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
58.4
Net Change (in millions)
11.2
Canada Graduate Scholarships
Description
The CGS program provides special recognition and financial support to students who are pursuing
masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada.
The increase is mainly the result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate Scholarships
allocations within the program, between the three granting agencies, to re-align with the research
landscape.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
39.2
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
41.8
Net Change (in millions)
2.8
Dementia and Brain Health in Aging
Description
Funding level increase to continue to support research across the continuum from promoting brain
health in aging to addressing the complex care needs of people living with dementia and their
caregivers.
Research activities focus on resilience, cognitive reserve and vulnerabilities in brain aging, as well as
modifiable factors for reduction of risk of development and progression of cognitive impairment and
dementia.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
3.1
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
5.3
Net Change (in millions)
2.2
Other - Increases
Compensation adjustments resulting from collective agreements
Description
Incremental funding to support salary increases of its employees.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
6.4
Net Change (in millions)
6.4
Gather national data on trends in drug use and harms in Canada
Description
Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) will support a Canada-wide study on
controlled substances that will generate baseline data for substance use on the current situation relating
to controlled substance use in Canada and signal emerging threats. Total funding transfer from Health
Canada to CIHR amounts to $6M over four fiscal years (2024-25 to 2027-28).
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
1.5
Net Change (in millions)
1.5
Non-material variances under $1.5M
Description
A total of $1.9M comprised of non-material items with funding variances of under $1.5M.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
1.9
Sunset - Decreases
Pediatric Cancer Research
Description
Funding from Budget 2021 of $30M over three years to fund pediatric cancer research leading to the
development of new scientifically proven treatments and cures that can lead to better outcomes and
healthier lives for young patients.
This items sunsets in 2023-24.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
14.6
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(14.6)
Cervical Cancer in Canada
Description
Off-cycle funding of $10M was provided over five years, to support research on Human papillomavirus
(HPV) vaccination and screening methods to contribute to a reduction of cervical cancer in Canada.
This item sunsets 2023-24.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
2.1
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(2.1)
Funding to address the Opioid crisis
Description
Funding from Budget 2019 and off-cycle budget decision of $7.2 over four years to fund research to
consolidate and analyze the results of pilot projects that offer safer alternatives to the illegal supply and
their impact on the communities within which they operate, and to to fund projects that increase the
evidence base on methamphetamine treatment guidelines and advance priority research.
This item (tranche of funding tied to the TB submission) sunsets in 2023-24, though supplementary
funds ($225K) have been transferred from HC to CIHR in 2024-25.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
2.4
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(2.4)
Other - Decreases
Reprofiling of the Clinical Trials Fund
Description
Funding level decrease due to the re-profile of funds from 2023-24 and 2024-25 to 2025-26 ad 2026-27
to support the final competition for clinical trials projects.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
81.4
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
76.7
Net Change (in millions)
(4.7)
Refocusing government spending to deliver for Canadians
Description
As part of meeting this commitment, CIHR is planning to reduce spending on its activities such as travel
and professional services.
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(1.4)
Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plan
Description
A total decrease of $0.1M in net year-over-year changes related to employee benefit plan
2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
2024-25 Main Estimates (in millions)
-
Net Change (in millions)
(0.1)
PART D. Supplemental
Question
Mr. Stephen Ellis (Cumberland—Colchester, CPC): Thanks, Chair. Thanks, Minister, for being here.
One of the things we say in medicine is primum non nocere. Above all, do no harm. We would like you to
table the data from which your government draws its information to tell us and Canadians when you're
going to end this dangerous experiment.
Hon. Ya'ara Saks: I thank the member for his question. As he's aware and I'm happy to table here all data
of our programs and the evidence that we have collected from our [Inaudible] projects and other
interventions are available on our website. We're happy to table them here.
….
Dr. Samuel Weiss: Thank you.
I'll say that the publication is a very good publication, it's outstanding. It's a retrospective study and
needs a lot more work in this area, and more work is being conducted by this group.
I think the evidence that is emerging from the study by [Inaudible] on the 11 safe supply sites suggests
that safe supply is beneficial to highly marginalized patients, assuming they also receive integrated
services alongside the safer supply. The evidence there is actually quite strong. It's already been
published, but it's qualitative in nature.
I think we are at a point now where safe supply, coupled with opioid agonist therapy, coupled with
psychosocial services as a collective, reaching people where they are, has a much greater chance of
keeping them alive and keeping them out of emergency rooms by not having safe supply, by not having
integrated services.
The evidence is growing, but it's... Sorry?
Mr. Marcus Powlowski (Thunder Bay—Rainy River, LPC): Can I cut you off there? I'm not so much
interested...okay, collectively these work, but I'm interested in safe supply per se, and/or if you could
give us the reference to the paper that you say shows benefits.
The Chair: Twenty seconds.
Dr. Samuel Weiss: I will forward that publication. There have been very few studies that have focused
exclusively on safe supply without other variables included. That was indeed one of the problems with
this study because the numbers, the variables, particularly for marginalized patients, are exceedingly
high and not always documented as part of a research study.
The Chair: Thank you, Dr. Weiss.
Response
16. With regard to the request above for “all data of our programs and the evidence that we have
collected”, the attached appendices provide a list of available evidence publications (as of early February
2024) related to the section 56 exemption in British Columbia (Appendix A) and prescribed alternatives
(Appendix B). These are provided in addition to those provided in the March 2022 HESA Supps C follow
up. The Government of Canada will continue to monitor Follow-Ups from February 1, 2024 Appearance
and assess evidence on these two issues as it becomes available.
With regard to the request for the specific study referenced by Dr. Weiss, the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR), with the support of Health Canada, is investing approximately $2.1 million over
4 years for the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) to conduct an independent
evaluation of prescribed alternative (also known as safer supply) pilot projects. This evaluation assesses
the program implementation and short- term health impacts of prescribed alternative pilot projects. An
early publication produced from this work is A Preliminary Assessment of Short-Term Social and
Substance Use-Related Outcomes Among Clients of Integrated Safer Opioid Supply Pilot Programs in
Toronto, Canada. Preliminary results include a number of positive impacts of prescribed alternatives,
including a decline in overdose incidents and spending on unregulated substances, a reduction in
engaging in criminalized forms of income generation, improvement in housing, food security and overall
health, among others.
As research findings become available, CIHR is committed to facilitating knowledge mobilization amongst
researchers, health care providers, policy makers, people with lived experience and peer support
workers. On May 10, 2023, CIHR hosted a midpoint knowledge exchange forum with knowledge users to
share and discuss the progress and current findings of the evaluation. A What We Heard Report
summarizing the discussion was subsequently published.
Appendix A – Publications related to the decriminalization of illegal drugs
Reports/studies demonstrating the impact of drug-related stigma on health and wellness:
1. Csete, J., Kamarulzaman, A., Kazatchkine, M., Altice, F., Balicki, M., Buxton, J., . . . Beyrer, C. (2016).
Public health and international drug policy. The Lancet, 387, 1427-80.
2. Collins, A. B., Boyd, J., Mayer, S., Fowler, A., Kennedy, M. C., Bluthenthal, R. N., . . . McNeil, R. (2019).
Policing space in the overdose crisis: A rapid ethnographic study of the impact of law enforcement
practices on the effectiveness of overdose prevention sites. International Journal of Drug Policy, 73, 199-
207. doi:10.1016/j.drugpo.2019.08.002
3. Mendes, P. N. (2019). Literature review on the implications of decriminalization for the care of drug
users in Portugal and Brazil. Cien Saude Colet, 3395-3406.
4. Paquette, C. E., Syvertsen, J. L., & Pollini, R. A. (2018). Stigma at every turn: Health services
experiences among people who inject drugs. International Journal of Drug Policy, 104-110.
5. Scher, B. D., Neufeld, S. D., Butler, A., Bonn, M., Zakimi, N., Farrell, J., & Greer, A. (2023).
"Criminalization causes the stigma:" Perspectives from people who use drugs. Contemporary Drug
Problems, 50(3), 402-425. doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/00914509231179226
6. Small, W., Kerr, T., Charette, J., Schechter, M. T., & Spittal, P. M. (2006). Impacts of intensified police
activity on injection drug users: Evidence from an ethnographic investigation. International Journal of
Drug Policy, 17(2), 85-95. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2005.12.005
Reports and studies on decriminalization models:
1. Eastwood, N., Fox, E., & Rosmarin, A. (2016). A Quiet Revolution: Drug Decriminalisation Across the
Globe. Retrieved from
https://www.release.org.uk/sites/default/files/pdf/publications/A%20Quiet%20Revolution %20-
%20Decriminalisation%20Across%20the%20Globe.pdf
2. Greer, A., Zakimi, N., Butler, A., & Ferencz, S. (2022). Simple possession as a 'tool': Drug law
enforcement practices among police officers in the context of depenalization in British Columbia,
Canada. International Journal of Drug Policy, 99, 103471. doi:10.1016/j.drugpo.2021.103471.
3. Stevens, A., Hughes, C. E., Hulme, S., & Cassidy, R. (2022). Depenalization, diversion and
decriminalization: A realist review and programme theory of alternatives to criminalization for simple
drug possession. European Journal of Criminology, 19(1), 29- 54.
4. Unlu, A., Tammi, T., & Hakkarainen. (2020). Drug Decriminalization Policy Literature Review: Models,
Implementation and Outcomes. Helsinki, Finland: Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare.
5. BC Exemption Request – Decriminalization in BC: S.56(1) Exemption; October 2021
Model-specific evaluations:
1. Davis, C. S., Joshi, S., Rivera, B. D., & Cerda, M. (2023). Changes in arrests following decriminalization
of low-level drug possession in Oregon and Washington. International Journal of Drug Policy, 119,
104155.
2. Joshi, S., Rivera, B. D., Cerda, M., Guy, G. P., Strahan, A., Wheelock, H., & Davis, C. S. (2023). One-year
association of drug possession law change with fatal drug overdose in Oregon and Washington. JAMA
Psychiatry, 80(12), 1277-1283. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.3416.
3. Felix, S., & Portugal, P. (2017). Drug decriminalization and the price of illicit drugs. International
Journal of Drug Policy, 39, 121-129. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.10.014
4. Greenwald, G. (2009). Drug decriminalization in Portugal: Lessons for creating fair and successful drug
policies. Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute. Retrieved from
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1464837
5. Hughes, C. E., & Stevens, A. (2010). What can we learn from the Portuguese decriminalization of illicit
drugs? British Journal of Criminology, 50(6), 999-1022. doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azq038
6. Laqueur, H. (2015). Uses and abuses of drug decriminalization in Portugal. Law and Social Inquiry,
40(3), 746-781.
7. Scheim, A. I., Maghsoudi, N., Marshall, Z., Churchill, S., Ziegler, C., & Werb, D. (2020). Impact
evaluations of drug decriminalisation and legal regulation on drug use, health and social harms: A
systemic review. BMJ Open, 10, e035148.
8. Sheehan, B. E., Grucza, R. A., & Plunk, A. D. (2021). Association of racial disparity of cannabis
possession arrests among adults and youth with statewide cannabis decriminalization and legalization.
JAMA Health Forum, 2(10), e213435.
9. Unlu, A., Tammi, T., & Hakkarainen. (2020). Drug Decriminalization Policy Literature Review: Models,
Implementation and Outcomes. Helsinki, Finland: Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare.
Appendix B – Evidence on prescribed alternative programs in Canada
Atkinson, K. (2023, March). Parkdale Queen West Community Health Centre Safer Opioid Supply
Program Evaluation Report. https://pqwchc.org/wp- content/uploads/PQWCHC_SOS_EvaluationReport-
Final-2023.pdf
Bardwell G, Ivsins A, Mansoor M, Nolan S, Kerr T. Safer opioid supply via a biometric dispensing machine:
a qualitative study of barriers, facilitators and associated outcomes. CMAJ. 2023 May 15;195(19):E668-
76.
CIHR Safer Supply Evaluation Mid-term Knowledge Exchange Forum What We Heard Report: Evaluation
of Harm Reduction Approaches to Address the Opioid Crisis in the Context of COVID-19 — Safer Supply
Evaluation - CIHR (cihr-irsc.gc.ca)Gagnon M, Rudzinski K, Guta A, Schmidt RA, Kryszajtys DT, Kolla G,
Strike C. Impact of safer supply programs on injection practices: client and provider experiences in
Ontario, Canada. Harm Reduction Journal. 2023 Dec;20(1):1-0.
Giang K, Charlesworth R, Thulien M, Mulholland A, Barker B, Brar R, et al. Risk mitigation guidance and
safer supply prescribing among young people who use drugs in the context of COVID-19 and overdose
emergencies. International Journal of Drug Policy. 2023 Apr 3;104023.
Glegg S, McCrae K, Kolla G, Touesnard N, Turnbull J, Brothers TD, Brar R, Sutherland C, Le Foll B, Sereda
A, Goyer MÈ. “COVID just kind of opened a can of whoop-ass”: The rapid growth of safer supply
prescribing during the pandemic documented through an environmental scan of addiction and harm
reduction services in Canada. International Journal of Drug Policy. 2022 Aug 1;106:103742.
Gomes T, Kolla G, McCormack D, Sereda A, Kitchen S, Antoniou T. Clinical outcomes and health care costs
among people entering a safer opioid supply program in Ontario. CMAJ. 2022 Sep 19;194(36):E1233-42.
Haines M, O’Byrne P. Safer opioid supply: qualitative program evaluation. Harm Reduction Journal. 2023
Dec;20(1):1-1. https://harmreductionjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12954-023-00776-z
Haines M, O'Byrne P. Implementing Safer Supply programs: A comparative case study. Journal of
Substance Use. 2023 Jul 29:1-6.
Haines, Tefoglou, & O'Byrne. (2023). Safer Supply Ottawa evaluation: Spring 2023 report.
https://safersupplyottawa.com/research/
Hong RH, Brar R, Fairbairn N. Supporting Self-isolation for COVID-19 With “Risk Mitigation” Prescribing
and Housing Supports for People Who Use Drugs: A Case Report. Journal of Addiction Medicine. 2022
Sep 14;16(5):592-4.
Ivsins A, MacKinnon L, Bowles JM, Slaunwhite A, Bardwell G. Overdose Prevention and Housing: a
Qualitative Study Examining Drug Use, Overdose Risk, and Access to Safer Supply in Permanent
Supportive Housing in Vancouver, Canada. Journal of Urban Health. 2022 Oct;99(5):855-64.
Karamouzian M, Rafat B, Kolla G, Urbanoski K, Atkinson K, Bardwell G, Bonn M, Touesnard N, Henderson
N, Bowles J, Boyd J. Challenges of implementing safer supply programs in Canada during the COVID-19
pandemic: A qualitative analysis. International Journal of Drug Policy. 2023 Oct 1;120:104157.Kolla,
Gillian & Kaitlin Fajber (2023). Safer Opioid Supply Program Evaluation: A comparison of SOS client
outcomes from 2022 and 2023. London: London Intercommunity Health Center. September 2023.
Kolla G, Tarannum CN, Fajber K, Worku F, Norris K, Long C, Fagundes R, Rucchetto A, Hannan E, Kikot R,
Klaiman M. Substance use care innovations during COVID-19: barriers and facilitators to the provision of
safer supply at a toronto COVID-19 isolation and recovery site. Harm Reduction Journal. 2024
Dec;21(1):1-4.
Kurz M, Guerra-Alejos BC, Min JE, Barker B, Pauly B, Urbanoski K, Nosyk B. Influence of physician
networks on the implementation of pharmaceutical alternatives to a toxic drug supply in British
Columbia. Implementation Science. 2024 Dec;19(1):1-3.
Mansoor M, Foreman-Mackey A, Ivsins A, Bardwell G. Community partner perspectives on the
implementation of a novel safer supply program in Canada: a qualitative study of the MySafe Project.
Harm Reduction Journal. 2023 Dec;20(1):1-2.
McAdam E, Hayashi K, Barker B, Reddon H, Choi J, Kerr T, DeBeck K. COVID-19 vaccination among young
people who use drugs in Vancouver, Canada. Vaccine. 2024 Jan 14.
Nafeh, F., Mbichila, T., Bouck, Z. et al. A Preliminary Assessment of Short-Term Social and Substance Use-
Related Outcomes Among Clients of Integrated Safer Opioid Supply Pilot Programs in Toronto, Canada.
Int J Ment Health Addiction (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11469-023-01219-3
Nguyen HV, Mital S, Bugden S, McGinty EE. British Columbia’s Safer Opioid Supply Policy and Opioid
Outcomes. JAMA Internal Medicine. 2024 Jan 16.
Ontario Drug Policy Research Network. Safer Opioid Supply: A Rapid Review of the Evidence. July 2023.
https://odprn.ca/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Safer-Opioid-Supply- Rapid-Review.pdf
Palis H, Haywood B, McDougall J, Xavier CG, Desai R, Tobias S, Burgess H, Ferguson M, Liu L, Kinniburgh
B, Slaunwhite AK. Factors associated with obtaining prescribed safer supply among people accessing
harm reduction services: findings from a cross-sectional survey. Harm Reduction Journal. 2024
Dec;21(1):1-3.
Perri, M., Fajber, K., Guta, A., Strike, C., Kolla, G. (2023). Outcomes from the Safer Supply Program in
Kitchener-Waterloo. Report 1. September 2023.
Scow M, McDougall J, Slaunwhite A, Palis H. Peer-led safer supply and opioid agonist treatment
medication distribution: a case study from rural British Columbia 2023.
Schmidt, Rose A., Nat Kaminski, David T. Kryszajtys, Katherine Rudzinski, Melissa Perri, Adrian Guta, Anita
C. Benoit, Ahmed M. Bayoumi, Laurel Challacombe, Jessica Hales, Kathleen Kenny, Gillian Kolla, Emmet
O'Reilly, Andrea Sereda, Nanky Rai, Carol Strike. ‘I don't chase drugs as much anymore, and I'm not
dead’: Client reported outcomes associated with safer opioid supply programs in Ontario, Canada. Drug
and Alcohol Review. 2023.
Selfridge M, Card K, Kandler T, Flanagan E, Lerhe E, Heaslip A, Nguyen A, Moher M, Pauly B, Urbanoski K,
Fraser C. Factors associated with 60-day adherence to “safer supply” opioids prescribed under British
Columbia's interim clinical guidance for health care providers to support people who use drugs during
COVID-19 and the ongoing overdose emergency. International Journal of Drug Policy. 2022 Jul
1;105:103709.
Shaleesa Ledlie, Ria Garg, Clare Cheng, Gillian Kolla, Tony Antoniou, Zachary Bouck, Tara Gomes,
Prescribed safer opioid supply: A scoping review of the evidence, International Journal of Drug Policy,
Volume 125, 2024, 104339, ISSN 0955-3959, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2024.104339.
Slaunwhite, A. H. Palis, B. Zhao, B. Nosyk, B. Pauly, K. Urbanoski, et al. Evaluation of the risk mitigation
guidance in British Columbia - Interim Findings (Knowledge update) (2021) (note – there are updates
released periodically).
Slaunwhite A, Min JE, Palis H, Urbanoski K, Pauly B, Barker B, Crabtree A, Bach P, Krebs E, Dale L, Meilleur
L. Effect of Risk Mitigation Guidance opioid and stimulant dispensations on mortality and acute care
visits during dual public health emergencies: retrospective cohort study. bmj. 2024 Jan 11;384.
Socias ME, Choi JC, Fairbairn N, Johnson C, Wilson D, Debeck K, Brar R, Hayashi K. Impacts of the COVID-
19 pandemic on enrollment in medications for opioid use disorder (MOUD) in Vancouver, Canada: An
interrupted time series analysis. International Journal of Drug Policy. 2023 Aug 1;118:104075.
Young S, Gomes T, Kolla G, McCormack D, Dodd Z, Raboud J, Bayoumi AM. Initiations of safer supply
hydromorphone increased during the COVID-19 pandemic in Ontario: An interrupted time series
analysis. Plos one. 2023 Dec 19;18(12):e0295145.
Question
Mrs. Laila Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake, CPC): Thank you, Mr. Chair.
In a Calgary Herald news article from December 26, 2023, indigenous leaders in Alberta referred to safe
supply as pharmaceutical colonization akin to genocide.
What consultations have been done with indigenous leaders and people in recovery regarding safe
supply, specifically with first nations on reserve?
Mr. Eric Costen (Associate Deputy Minister, Department of Health): I don't mean to sound overly
bureaucratic in the response.
The way that we support the safer supply projects at the federal level is an application-based process.
The projects that are being funded right now are those that made applications to us. To date, there
aren't sites in Alberta on first nations communities with respect to safer supply.
Mrs. Laila Goodridge: I did not ask in regards to Alberta. I asked in regards to indigenous on first nations.
Mr. Eric Costen: Okay. Do you mean specific to safer supply or just generally to the crisis?
Mrs. Laila Goodridge: It’s specific to safe supply.
Mr. Eric Costen: I might have to get back to you on that.
We have lots of conversations with indigenous communities about the crisis and we talk about all
manner of interventions, but I would have to get back to you on whether there is a specific safer supply
conversation.
Mrs. Laila Goodridge: Please table it with the committee.
Response
Health Canada has engaged a wide range of stakeholders on the overdose crisis in Canada, including
people with lived and living experience (people using substances, people in treatment and recovery, and
family members), medical professionals and addictions medicine specialists, front-line substance use
service providers, researchers, provinces and territories, professional medical regulatory bodies, law
enforcement, and Indigenous leadership and organizations. This includes ongoing engagement, and also
formal consultation mechanisms such as the department’s People with Lived and Living Experience
Council, the F/P/T Committee on Substance Use, the Expert Task Force on Substance Use, the Expert
Advisory Group on Safer Supply, and the Canadian Pain Task Force, amongst others.
ISC’s Mental Wellness Program provides $650M annually to support culturally grounded community-
based mental wellness initiatives that include: life promotion and suicide prevention, including on-the-
land activities; substance use prevention and treatment; mental wellness teams; the Hope for Wellness
Help Line; and the Indian Residential Schools Resolution Health Support Program which provides mental
health, cultural, and emotional support to former Indian Residential School and Federal Indian Day
School students and their families and those affected by the issue of Missing and Murdered Indigenous
Women and Girls.
To respond to public health challenges presented by the ongoing opioid crisis, funding has been provided
to support 82 opioid agonist therapy sites that offer comprehensive wraparound to over 100
communities. The program has also undertaken the coordination of bulk purchases of naloxone and
nasal spray naloxone; and increasing access to take-home naloxone kits and training in their use.
Indigenous Services Canada has also supported Thunderbird Partnership Foundation to establish a
national stockpile available to Indigenous communities and organizations. Indigenous Services Canada
currently funds a network of 45 treatment centres, as well as drug and alcohol prevention services in
most Indigenous communities across Canada. Treatment centres provide a range of mainstream and
culturally relevant approaches; access to inpatient, outpatient, and day treatment services; services for
unique needs (e.g., programming for families, solvent or problematic drug use, and concurrent
disorders); and are grounded in traditional culture.
Indigenous Services Canada has ongoing and regular engagement with First Nations leadership on
mental wellness and substance use issues. This includes First Nations regional partnership tables, tribal
councils, and communities, and national First Nations organizations like Thunderbird Partnership
Foundation and the Assembly of First Nations. These partnerships have the creation of key framework
documents and strategies such as: Honoring Our Strengths- A Renewed Framework to Address
Substance Use Issues Among First Nations People in Canada, the First Nations Mental Wellness
Continuum Framework, First Nations Health Priorities to Reducing Problematic Opioid Use- A First
Nations Specific Opioid Strategy, First Nations Opioid and Methamphetamine Survey- National Aggregate
Short Report, and 2023 First Nations Substance Use Summit- Final Report. The documents developed
from consultations guide the work of Indigenous Services Canada including the toxic drug crisis.
The Non-Insured Health Benefits Program covers a range of prescription drugs and over-the- counter
medications listed on the NIHB Drug Benefit List. As a drug plan, NIHB is actively engaged in monitoring
and responding to the opioid crisis in the scope of drug reimbursement. Safer supply is an emerging
harm reduction policy approach with active evidence generation. The NIHB Program has a robust suite of
evidence-based problematic substance use initiatives such as opioid dose limits, meant to tightly control
access to potentially problematic substances. As a result, the Program requires careful analysis and well-
considered interventions to integrate innovative approaches into the existing framework to ensure
continued client safety and appropriate use. NIHB engages regularly with the NIHB Drugs and
Therapeutics Advisory Committee, composed of highly qualified health professionals, including First
Nations health professionals and an addictions specialist, to review emerging evidence on safer supply
and seek expert advice. NIHB responds on a case-by-case basis to individual circumstances to apply safe
supply principles in a controlled and responsive manner such that access and safety are appropriately
balanced. Safety parameters include following dose limits in recognized guidelines for safer supply and
frequent dispensing of small quantities of safe supply opioids. NIHB will continue to monitor new
evidence as well as Provincial and Territorial approaches closely, and engage with experts to develop
policy that is responsive to innovative approaches while promoting client safety.
Through the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), Health Canada is currently providing more
than $49.8 million to 50 projects led by, and/or focused on, First Nations communities across Canada.
These innovative and evidence-informed projects focus on substance use prevention, harm reduction
and treatment for a range of substances, including opioids, cannabis, and methamphetamines. Project
activities range from direct service delivery, to building capacity among the substance use workforce, to
developing peer-led best practices, and to disseminating culturally relevant and appropriate research
findings.
While Health Canada provides time- limited funding for prescribed alternatives (i.e. safer supply) pilot
projects through SUAP, none of these projects are located in First Nations communities. SUAP projects
are approved for funding based on an application process, and to date Health Canada has not received
an application for a prescribed alternatives pilot project from a First Nations community.
Question
Mrs. Laila Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake, CPC): Thank you. I appreciate that.
I'm very concerned about the decriminalization and the change in the tone from Minister Bennett to
now Minister Saks with regard to how there would be measures taken to stop or change
decriminalization if measures weren't being met. Now it's that we have to do everything we possibly can
because this is a crisis well beyond our control, without even looking at the fact that perhaps this is
causing it.
Are there any specific metrics that could be tabled with this committee as to what the public health and
public safety metrics are for decriminalization?
Mr. Eric Costen (Associate Deputy Minister, Department of Health): There's the study that Dr. Weiss
referred to earlier. There's a systematic study of decriminalization, a three-year study, with very clear
indicators and metrics that are meant to inform about successes, risks and benefits of the initiative—
effectively, the answer to the question you're asking.
At the time of issuing the exemption, the government was very clear in saying that it wants to learn as
much as it can from this experience and that it would be prepared to act and adjust in response to the
information that would be provided. To my knowledge, that's still the policy.
Mrs. Laila Goodridge: Are there any hard metrics? For example, if it goes beyond a certain number of
deaths, the answer would be no?
Yes, Mr. Weiss.
Dr. Samuel Weiss (Scientific Director, Institute of Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction, Canadian
Institutes of Health Research): The study that's been referred to will be looking at the public health
impacts of decriminalization on people who use drugs. We'll be looking at the criminal justice impacts.
We'll be looking at decriminalizing policy impacts for the general public, looking at the impact on the
health service system itself—
Mrs. Laila Goodridge: If you could table that with the committee, that would be great. We don't have
tons of time.
Response
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is supporting a five-year evaluation of the impacts of
the section 56 exemption in British Columbia. The independent, arm’s length study is led by the Ontario
Node of the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). The research team has published
the evaluation design on the CRISM website: Decriminalization of Illicit Substances in British Columbia:
Evaluation Design. The evaluation design consists of several interconnected sub-studies; more
information about these sub-studies and their specific indicators are also published on the CRISM
website:
Qualitative Evaluation of the Impact of Decriminalization on People Who Use Drugs (PWUD)
Qualitative Evaluation of the Impact of Decriminalization on Police
Quantitative Evaluation of the Impact of Decriminalization on Health and Criminal Justice Outcomes
Public Opinion Poll (POP) Survey on the Impact of Decriminalization on the General Public
Mixed-Methods Evaluation of the Impact of Decriminalization on Harm Reduction and Opioid Agonist
Treatment (OAT) Services
Economic Evaluation of the Impact of Decriminalization
In addition, B.C. provided a first report on the early outcomes of decriminalization through its Mental
Health and Substance Use Data Snapshot which reports on four areas: changes to law enforcement
practices, changes in the socio-emotional wellbeing of people living with addiction, pathways to services
and treatment and public awareness and understanding of decriminalization.
Question
Mr. Shuvaloy Majumdar (Calgary Heritage, CPC): Thank you, Chair.
Recently, a new fentanyl prescription protocol was established in British Columbia. Under this protocol,
physicians are allowed to prescribe fentanyl to children without parental consent or awareness.
Have you raised any concerns to the minister about the prescription of fentanyl, a drug so toxic that
Health Canada's website states that even a few grains could kill you?
Mr. Eric Costen (Associate Deputy Minister, Department of Health): Thank you for the question, Chair.
We've spoken to the minister at length about the crisis writ large and about developments in British
Columbia. With respect to the prescription guideline that you're describing, we've made the minister
aware that based on our conversations with the B.C. government, the latest information we have is that
while the guidance has been enacted, no prescriptions have in fact been provided to anyone under the
age of 19.
That would be about the extent of the conversations we've had with her at this point on that particular
guidance.
Mr. Shuvaloy Majumdar: If you don't mind, when were you first made aware of the protocol?
Mr. Eric Costen: I honestly couldn't say on the spot here.
Mrs. Laila Goodridge: Could they table it with the committee—
Mr. Shuvaloy Majumdar: Could you table it with the committee when you do discover at what point you
found out?
Mr. Eric Costen: Sure. Absolutely.
Response
Health Canada became aware of the prescribed alternatives protocols for fentanyl tablets and sufentanil
developed by the BC Centre on Substance Use shortly after their publication in late August 2023. Health
Canada did not play a role in the development, review or approval of these protocols.
41. Recent OPQs
1. Q-1708
September 14, 2023 — Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock) — With regard to the government’s
safer supply program: (a) what were the projections showing a reduction of overdoses that were used to
justify implementing the program; (b) off of what methodology were the projections in (a) based; (c)
what is the government’s explanation for why the number of overdoses increased following the
implementation of the program; and (d) when did the government first become aware that its
projections showing that overdoses would decrease were flawed and inaccurate?
2. Q-1754
September 25, 2023 — Mr. Lloyd (Sturgeon River—Parkland) — With regard to the upcoming tenth
session of the Conference of the Parties (COP10) to the World Health Organization (WHO) Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control, from November 10 to 25, 2023, and the third session of the Meeting of
Parties (MOP3) to the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, from November 27 to 30,
2023: (a) how many individuals will be part of the government's delegation and what are their names
and titles; (b) what is the overall budget for the government's COP10 and MOP3 participation, broken
down by (i) accommodations, (ii) meals or per diems, (iii) hospitality; (c) what are the government's key
priorities or action items for both the COP10 and MOP3; and (d) has the government been assigned any
specific agenda items or resolutions for both the COP1O and MOP3, and, if so, what are they?
3. Q-1760
September 26, 2023 — Mr. Khanna (Oxford) — With regard to the government’s response to drug
addiction: (a) what are the government’s estimates on the number of Canadians who are addicted to
illicit drugs, broken down by substance; (b) for each substance in (a), what is the government’s strategy
to get those addicted into treatment and recovery, or to otherwise stop the addiction; (c) how much
funding is being provided for the treatment and recovery strategy, broken down by year for the next five
years; and (d) what are the government’s targets on how many fewer people will be addicted to each
substance in (a), broken down by substance and year for the next five years?
4. Q-1776
September 28, 2023 — Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock) — With regard to the government’s
“safe supply” initiative: (a) how much (i) heroin, (ii) crack cocaine, (iii) cocaine, (iv) fentanyl, (v)
methamphetamine or crystal methamphetamine, (vi) other substance, broken down by type, does the
government estimate was distributed as part of “safe supply” in total and broken down by year since
2018; and (b) what is the breakdown of (a) by province or territory?
5. Q-1809
October 12, 2023 — Mr. Ellis (Cumberland—Colchester) — With regard to the government's Substance
Use and Addictions Program, broken down annually for each of the last five years: (a) how much funding
has been provided through the program; (b) how was the funding spent, broken down by type of
expenditure; (c) what are the details of the funding recipients, including (i) which entities received
funding through the program, including the name and location of each entity, (ii) how much funding
each entity receive, (iii) what the funding was intended for; (d) what was the breakdown of the funding
by province or territory and by municipal area, if known; and (e) what was the breakdown of the funding
by type of substance?
6. Q-2043
November 30, 2023 — Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake) — With regard to the government's
Substance Use and Addictions Program and the funding of London InterCommunity Health Centre (LIHC)
program: (a) what criteria has the government established to measure the success of the LIHC program,
and are these success criteria being met; (b) how frequently does the government receive updates or
reports from the LIHC regarding its performance and success in meeting the specified criteria; (c) what is
the government’s explanation for why the number of overdoses increased following the implementation
of the program; (d) what is the government’s explanation for why opioid- related deaths and
hospitalizations are greater in the Middlesex—London area compared to the rest of Ontario; (e) is the
government studying or assessing the diversion of drugs from the LIHC program; (f) what measures are
being taken to prevent the diversion of drugs from the LIHC program; and (g) how is the government
educating the public about the harms of diversion?
7. Q-2116
December 12, 2023 — Mr. Johns (Courtenay—Alberni) — With regard to Health Canada’s Substance Use
and Addictions Program (SUAP), and broken down by fiscal year since 2021- 22: (a) what are the details
of all requests for funding from community-led and not-for-profit organizations, including the (i) date of
the request, (ii) requester name, (iii) amount of funding requested, (iv) amount of funding approved; (b)
what is the total amount of funding that was requested by community-led and not-for-profit
organizations; (c) what is the total amount of funding that was provided to community-led and not-for-
profit organizations; (d) broken down by level of government, what are the details of all funding transfers
to provincial, territorial, or municipal governments, including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester
name, (iii) amount of funding requested, and (iv) amount of funding approved; (e) what is the total
amount of funding that was requested by other levels of government; and (f) what was the total amount
of funding provided to other levels of government?
8. Q-2190
December 13, 2023 — Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake) — With regard to meetings involving
the government about safe supply, safer supply, pharmaceutical alternatives to the toxic, illegal or illicit
drug supply, pharmaceutical grade medication as an alternative to the toxic, illegal or illicit drug supply,
and medications for substance use disorder and to provide pharmaceutical alternatives to the
contaminated illegal or illicit drug supply: what are the details of meetings over the last five years
between government and pharmaceutical companies, government and opioid manufacturers,
government and lobby companies, and government and stakeholders, including, for each, the (i) date, (ii)
location, (iii) type and purpose of the meeting, (iv) names of the organizations represented, (v) names
and titles of the individuals in attendance, including both government officials and other attendees?
9. Q-2204
December 14, 2023 — Mr. Davies (Vancouver Kingsway) — With regard to the federal tobacco control
strategy for fiscal year 2022-23: (a) what was the budget for the strategy; (b) how much of that budget
was spent within each fiscal year; (c) how much was spent on each component of the strategy,
specifically (i) mass media, (ii) policy and regulatory development, (iii) research, (iv) surveillance, (v)
enforcement, (vi) grants and contributions, (vii) programs for Indigenous Canadians; (d) were any other
activities not listed in (c) funded by the strategy, and, if so, how much was spent on each of these
activities; and (e) was part of the budget reallocated for purposes other than tobacco control, and, if so,
how much was reallocated?
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1708 BY
Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock)
DATE
September 14, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the government’s safer supply program: (a) what were the projections showing a
reduction of overdoses that were used to justify implementing the program; (b) off of what methodology
were the projections in (a) based; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the number of
overdoses increased following the implementation of the program; and (d) when did the government
first become aware that its projections showing that overdoses would decrease were flawed and
inaccurate?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Since 2017, guided by the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS), the Government of Canada
has taken a comprehensive approach to address substance use issues and the overdose crisis, supported
by over $1 billion in spending. There is no one-size-fits-all solution to prevent or reduce overdose deaths
— a full range of services and supports are needed.
Safer supply sits within a continuum of services where medications are prescribed in the context of a
therapeutic relationship between a healthcare provider and a patient. Safer supply services are informed
by well-established domestic and international evidence from medication-assisted treatment (MAT)
services, which are considered the gold standard of treatment for substance use disorder.
With regard to questions (a) and (b) above, surveillance conducted by the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) on the overdose crisis shows a significant increase in apparent opioid-toxicity deaths in
Canada beginning with the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, and rates remain elevated today. PHAC also
conducts forward modelling to provide estimates of how many opioid-related deaths may occur over
the coming months in Canada. Projections are based on assumptions regarding the toxicity of the illegal
drug supply and the impact of health interventions. The model considers all health interventions
together and does not report projections for specific interventions, such as safer supply. The model is
updated twice a year, in June and December.
Health Canada recognizes that additional high-quality evidence is needed that address potential benefits
and risks of safer supply. To help build this evidence, Health Canada is supporting assessment and
evaluation projects related to Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP)-funded pilot projects. This
includes a preliminary assessment of 10 safer supply pilot projects in Ontario, British Columbia and New
Brunswick. The federal government, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), is also
supporting a study being conducted by a research team from the Canadian Research Initiative in
Substance Misuse. This four-year evaluation research project focuses on program implementation and
the short-term health outcomes of eleven of the government funded safer supply pilot projects. The
final results of this study are expected in 2025. Additionally, CIHR has awarded $2 million to the
University of Victoria to support a four-year study evaluating the safer supply initiatives in British
Columbia in partnership with Indigenous leaders, Elders and system partners.
With regard to questions (c) and (d) above, there is no one single intervention alone that will reduce
overdose deaths and solve the overdose crisis. This crisis is being driven by a highly toxic illegal drug
supply and a number of underlying socio-economic factors. This is why the federal government has taken
a broad, comprehensive approach under the CDSS focusing on prevention, treatment, harm reduction
and enforcement.
All SUAP-funded safer supply pilot projects are time-limited, innovative interventions designed to
evaluate the effectiveness of providing pharmaceutical-grade medications as safer alternatives to the
contaminated illegal drug supply in Canada. These pilot projects must have linkages to provincial and/or
territorial health systems, involvement of people with lived and living experience of substance use in
design and planning, prescriber/health care provider oversight, and must demonstrate commitments to
research and evaluation.
Safer supply services exist in a limited number of locations in Canada, and currently serve a relatively
small number of clients compared to the total number of people who use drugs and who are at risk of
overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply in Canada. At the federal level, there are 29 funded pilot
projects, serving approximately 4,300 clients nationally. The focus of federally funded projects has been
on building the evidence around this new practice.
Under the CDSS, the Government of Canada will continue to undertake a comprehensive and evidence-
based approach to substance use issues and the overdose crisis, including testing new ideas and
approaches to help save lives and reduce harms. We will continue to work with all levels of governments
and key stakeholders, who also have critical roles to play. We will continue to monitor and assess all
available evidence regarding our approach, including studying the outcomes of safer supply pilot
projects, to inform both current and future actions, and make adjustments including implementing risk
mitigation measures as appropriate.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1754 BY
Mr. Lloyd (Sturgeon River—Parkland)
DATE
September 25, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the upcoming tenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP10) to the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, from November 10 to 25, 2023, and the third
session of the Meeting of Parties (MOP3) to the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products,
from November 27 to 30, 2023: (a) how many individuals will be part of the government's delegation
and what are their names and titles; (b) what is the overall budget for the government's COP10 and
MOP3 participation, broken down by (i) accommodations, (ii) meals or per diems, (iii) hospitality; (c)
what are the government's key priorities or action items for both the COP10 and MOP3; and (d) has the
government been assigned any specific agenda items or resolutions for both the COP1O and MOP3, and,
if so, what are they?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
In accordance with the Directive on Travel, Hospitality, Conference and Event Expenditures, Health
Canada strives to find economical means of travel while considering alternatives that minimize or limit
travel costs. This includes limiting the number of departmental travellers to the minimum necessary to
deliver the business of government, making use of virtual options of participation when available, and
selecting economical meals of travel when booking transportation and accommodations.
a. The Government of Canada plans to send a delegation of ten individuals to COP10, November 20-25,
2023, including:
Dr. Sonia Johnson, Director General, Tobacco Control Directorate (TCD), Controlled Substances and
Cannabis Branch (CSCB), Health Canada (HC)
Ms. Laura Smith, Director, Office of Policy and Strategic Planning (OPSP), TCD, CSCB, HC
Mr. Denis Choinière, Director, Tobacco Products Regulatory Office, TCD, CSCB, HC
Ms. Kemba Anderson-Gohlor, Regional Coordinator to the Conference of the Parties for the Region of the
Americas, and Manager, Regulatory and International Policy Unit, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
Mr. Dylan Upper, Acting Manager, Multilateral Relations Division, Office of International Affairs for the
Health Portfolio
Ms. Angélique Bisson, Senior Policy Analyst, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
Ms. Mireille Rigby, Senior Policy Analyst, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
One domestic Non-governmental Organization Representative
Two representatives from the Government of Québec (Provincial/territorial representatives – travelling
at their own expense)
b. The total cost of travel for COP10, for delegates whose travel is being funded by Health Canada, is as
follows:
i. Accommodations: $9,500
ii. Meals and per diems: $11,651
iii. Hospitality: N/A
Please note, flights are still in the process of being booked, therefore the final cost is unavailable at this
time. Estimated flights costs are: $16,500.
c. The government’s key priorities for COP10 are focused on bolstering the Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control implementation globally, enhancing transparency and accountability of the COP and
exploring measures that go beyond the FCTC. In particular, Canada will focus on:
1. Forward Looking Tobacco Control Measures: Canada has put forward a proposal to COP to consider
exploring tobacco control measures that extend beyond the provisions of the WHO Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC). Through this decision point, Canada’s aims to generate new
discussions on tobacco control and reinvigorate a collective response to the global tobacco epidemic.
2. Supporting Global Implementation of the FCTC: Canada is committed to supporting a new peer-review
and evaluation support mechanism. Canada believes this mechanism will strengthen global
implementation of the FCTC, ensuring that its provisions are effectively translated into action at the
national level. The WHO Convention Secretariat report associated with this agenda item, can be found at
the following link: https://storage.googleapis.com/who-fctc-cop10-source/Main%20documents/fctc-
cop10-14-en.pdf
3. Enhancing Transparency and Accountability: Canada will advocate for increased transparency and
accountability of COP through webcasting the plenary sessions.
These priorities underscore Canada’s dedication to public health and our leadership in the global tobacco
control community.
d. Canada has not been assigned any specific agenda items for COP, but Canada will be presenting a draft
decision for adoption on “Forward looking tobacco control measures” as is detailed above. The WHO
Convention Secretariat report associated with this agenda item , can be found at the following link:
https://storage.googleapis.com/who-fctc-cop10-source/Main%20documents/fctc-cop10-11-en.pdf
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1760 BY
Mr. Khanna (Oxford)
DATE
September 26, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the government’s response to drug addiction: (a) what are the government’s estimates
on the number of Canadians who are addicted to illicit drugs, broken down by substance; (b) for each
substance in (a), what is the government’s strategy to get those addicted into treatment and recovery, or
to otherwise stop the addiction; (c) how much funding is being provided for the treatment and recovery
strategy, broken down by year for the next five years; and (d) what are the government’s targets on how
many fewer people will be addicted to each substance in (a), broken down by substance and year for the
next five years?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Since 2016, guided by the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS), the Government of Canada
has taken a comprehensive approach to address substance use issues and the overdose crisis, supported
by a full range of evidence-based actions, focused on prevention, harm reduction, treatment and
enforcement.
Regarding question (a) People’s substance use can change and move across a range over time, from no
use at one end to substance use disorder at the other end. Additionally, stigma associated with
substance use can cause individuals to hide their use. Given these considerations, it is difficult to
estimate the number of Canadians who have a substance use disorder.
Findings from the Mental Health Access to Care Survey, 2022 estimate that 0.5% percent of Canadians
met the criteria for recurrent use with associated harms or dependence of substances such as cocaine,
ecstasy, hallucinogens (e.g., PCP, LSD), heroin, solvents, other illegal drugs and nonmedical use of
prescription sedatives, analgesics, stimulants in the past 12 months and 3.6% of Canadians met the
criteria at some point in their lifetime. These estimates were unchanged (i.e., the differences were not
statistically significant) from 0.7% and 4.0%, respectively, in 2012.
Regarding question (b) and (c) Health care and addressing substance use is a shared responsibility with
provinces and territories. While provinces and territories are primarily responsible for the delivery of
substance-use treatment services, the federal government has a role to play in supporting the availability
of evidence-based treatment options. The Government of Canada recognizes that improved access to
treatment services can help those struggling with substance use and save lives. This includes actions
such as:
Removing barriers to accessing medications used for the treatment of opioid use disorder by:
Issuing a class exemption for patients, practitioners, and pharmacists prescribing and providing
controlled substances in Canada to ensure continuity of care;
Approving injectable hydromorphone and diacetylmorphine as treatment options for patients with
severe opioid use disorder; and,
Facilitating the prescribing and dispensing of methadone and diacetylmorphine through regulatory
amendments.
Funding the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse to identify or develop appropriate
evidence-based clinical and community-based interventions for substance use and to facilitate providers
and decision-makers in implementing services that we know are effective. This includes guidance
documents for the treatment of opioid and other substance use disorders.
Partnering with the Standards Council of Canada to coordinate the development of standards for mental
health and substance use health services in key areas, including withdrawal management and
competencies for non-addictions healthcare providers, with a focus on health equity.
To support the timely access to quality mental health and substance use services for individuals in
Canada, regardless of where they live. The Government of Canada also provides support to provinces
and territories in their direct delivery of substance-use treatment services through investments. For
example, through Budget 2023, the Government of Canada is providing $196.1 billion over ten years,
including $46.2 billion in new funding through the Canada Health Transfer and other mechanisms, for
provinces and territories to improve health care services for Canadians, which includes$25 billion over
ten years to provinces and territories for bilateral agreements to address unique needs in four shared
health priorities, including access to quality mental health and substance use services.
In addition, the federal government will invest $2 billion over 10 years to support Indigenous priorities
and $505 million over 5 years in complementary federal support.
These investments build on previous federal initiatives aimed at supporting the provinces and territories
in improving access to treatment and recovery services for substance use disorders, including:
Significant investments from the Government of Canada in treatment services, including committing
$150 million through Budget 2018 for the Emergency Treatment Fund, which ended in March 2023. This
funding was matched by the provinces and territories, bringing the total investment to $300 million.
Provinces and territories have used federal investments to expand treatment approaches such as
services to support youth with substance use disorder, withdrawal management services appropriate for
people who use methamphetamine, Rapid Access Addictions Medicine clinics, expand access to opioid
dependence treatments, and culturally-appropriate care for Indigenous communities.
Funds have also been used to implement innovative approaches to treatment including ‘wrap-around’
care and the development of telehealth infrastructure to connect clients to treatment in remote and
rural settings.
The Government of Canada invested $5 billion over ten years in 2017 to support the provinces and
territories in improving access to mental health and substance use services and supports. Federal,
provincial and territorial governments also agreed as part of A Common Statement of Principles on
Shared Health Priorities, to report on progress on improving access to these services through the
Canadian Institute for Health Information.
Budget 2023 also provides $359.2 million to support the implementation of a renewed CDSS for new and
on-going activities to support a continuum of care for people who use substances, including prevention,
treatment, harm reduction, and recovery.
The funding announced in Budget 2023 will complement the more than $505 million since 2017 that
SUAP has already committed to over 380 innovative and evidence-informed projects including substance
use prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across the country. Through active SUAP
agreements, $156.1 million is committed over the next 5 years (Fiscal Year (FY) 2023/24 to FY 2027/28)
to fund a wide-range of projects that address substance use issues across the continuum of care. Of this
funding, $63.25 million has been committed to organizations that deliver treatment and recovery
initiatives. The table below provides a breakdown of this funding by fiscal year:
SUAP Funding: Treatment and Recovery Projects
FY 23/24
$26,448,050
FY 24/25
$34,067,162
FY 25/26
$2,730,205
Total
$63,245,417
Regarding question (d) The Government of Canada is committed to reporting on results of the CDSS
through Health Canada’s Departmental Results Report.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1776 BY
Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock)
DATE
September 28, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the government’s “safe supply” initiative: (a) how much (i) heroin, (ii) crack cocaine, (iii)
cocaine, (iv) fentanyl, (v) methamphetamine or crystal methamphetamine, (vi) other substance, broken
down by type, does the government estimate was distributed as part of “safe supply” in total and broken
down by year since 2018; and (b) what is the breakdown of (a) by province or territory?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Most healthcare services that support people who use drugs fall under provincial and territorial
jurisdiction, and the federal government does not routinely collect detailed information on drug
treatment or safer supply programs that are run by provinces and territories.
It should be noted that prescribers can only prescribe medications pursuant to the requirements of the
Food and Drug Act, the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, and their associated Regulations. Illegally
produced drugs such as crystal methamphetamine and crack cocaine do not exist in pharmaceutical
form, and thus are not used in medication-assisted drug treatment programs or safer supply programs.
For its part, Health Canada provides time-limited grants and contributions funding to 29 safer supply
pilot projects to help save lives and build evidence in terms of both benefits and risks of safer supply. Of
these 29 projects, 4 focus on research, knowledge exchange, and evaluation, and 24 provide services
directly to clients in BC, Ontario, and New Brunswick. Federal grants and contributions funding is also
provided to the Government of Quebec directly to help support substance use services delivered by the
province, including safer supply (counted as 1 project)
The following table provides the most up to data available on substances used in Health Canada funded,
safer supply projects. These medications evolve over time at the discretion of prescribers, based on the
clients they serve. Some of the medications are prescribed on-label for opioid use disorder, and some
are prescribed off-label (i.e. not for their labeled indication).
Substance BC(8 projects) ON (15 projects) NB (1 projects) Total (24 projects)
Fentanyl (various formulations offered, including patches and tablets)
BC 7
ON 4
NB 1
Total 12
Tablet hydromorphone
BC 8
ON 13
NB 0
Total 21
Injectable hydromorphone
BC 4
ON 4
NB 1
Total 9
Injectable diacetylmorphine
BC 1
ON -
NB -
Total 1
Oxycodone
BC 2
ON 2
NB -
Total 4
Stimulant Therapy (various formulations offered, including amphetamine/dextroamphetamine,
lisdexamfetamine dimesylate, and methylphenidate)
BC 3
ON 8
NB 1
Total 12
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1809 BY
Mr. Ellis (Cumberland—Colchester)
DATE
October 12, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictionsnand Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the government's Substance Use and Addictions Program, broken down annually for each
of the last five years: (a) how much funding has been provided through the program; (b) how was the
funding spent, broken down by type of expenditure; (c) what are the details of the funding recipients,
including (i) which entities received funding through the program, including the name and location of
each entity, (ii) how much funding each entity receive, (iii) what the funding was intended for; (d) what
was the breakdown of the funding by province or territory and by municipal area, if known; and (e) what
was the breakdown of the funding by type of substance?
Health Canada
a. Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides time-limited grants and
contributions funding that supports evidence-informed initiatives that help to address the overdose
crisis and substance use issues. Between 2019 and 2024, over $450M has been provided through the
program. The SUAP funding broken down annually for each of the last five years is as follows by fiscal
year (FY):
FY 2019/2020: $37,417,022
FY 2020/2021: $63,154,980
FY 2021/2022: $85,313,019
FY 2022/2023: $140,061,872
FY 2023/2024: $124,369,591
Total: $450,316,484
b. Program grants and contribution funding is allocated to recipient organizations in support of a defined
set of activities. Eligible expenses are defined under the SUAP Terms and Conditions, described in the
Guidelines for Applicants for each SUAP call for proposals and outlined in the Contribution Agreements.
Health Canada does not track individual expenditures by each organization. Rather, in accordance with
the Policy on Transfer Payments, all SUAP program funding recipients must provide a detailed cashflow
forecast once per year, as well as a record of expenditures twice per year. Payments are made in the
form of reimbursement to program recipients for eligible expenditures incurred following acceptance by
internal oversight and control systems.
c. A full summary of the 374 funding recipients which received funding from 2019/20 to 2023/24 is
attached (see Annex A).
This document includes a list of organization names, project titles and description, location including city
and province, amount of funding committed and what the funding was or is intended for, for each entity.
Please note that this data was extracted on October 13, 2023.
d. The following figures show the breakdown of SUAP funding through 2019/20-2023/24 by
province/territory and by municipal area:
Note: The number of projects funded in each province or territory can vary based on several factors.
Regions with a higher population or with a higher concentration of national-scope not-for-profit
organizations, such as Ontario, have a larger number of active projects than smaller jurisdictions. As per
a 2017 agreement between the Minister of Health and Quebec’s Ministère de la Santé et des Services
sociaux (MSSS), SUAP funding proportionate to Quebec’s percentage of the Canadian population
(approximately 22.5% of total SUAP funding), is allocated to Quebec. Under this agreement, SUAP has
signed Contribution Agreements directly with the MSSS and the MSSS works with partner organizations
to redistribute SUAP funds within the province. Other projects funded in the province are national in
scope.
ALBERTA
29 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Atikameg - - - $109,489 $39,320 $148,809
Calgary $735,539 $1,075,894 $2,456,173 $4,089,249 $3,067,653 $11,424,508
Eden Valley - - - $721,072 $678,968 $1,400,040
Edmonton $464,879 $1,151,515 $1,778,122 $3,709,041 $1,383,361 $8,486,918
Edmonton & Calgary - $158,873 $175,375 $116,202 $29,775 $480,225
Fort McMurray - - - $440,973 $299,386 $740,359
Grand Prairie - - - $120,138 $921,522 $1,041,660
Onoway - - $150,000 $150,000 - $300,000
Standoff - - - $688,028 $467,117 $1,155,145
Stony Plain - - - $502,914 $1,969,485 $2,472,399
$27,650,063
BRITISH COLUMBIA
90 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Agassiz - - - $20,150 $253,123 $273,273
Burnaby - - - $401,825 $541,429 $943,254
Campbell River - - - $1,508,724 $1,515,951 $3,024,675
Chilliwack - - - $103,361 $930,247 $1,033,608
Comox - - - $10,000 $65,000 $75,000
Delta - - - $167,969 $1,146,441 $1,314,410
Houston - - $210,700 $212,303 $212,303 $635,306
Kelowna - $174,250 $291,750 $712,396 $492,042 $1,670,438
Mission - - - $14,450 $150,921 $165,371
Nanaimo - - - $864,488 $701,288 $1,565,776
Nelson $20,000 $262,000 $284,000 $397,985 $397,985 $1,361,970
New Westminster - - - $231,450 $567,151 $798,601
Pender Island - $11,523 $165,356 $168,056 $168,056 $512,991
Penticton - - - $7,390 $166,966 $174,356
Port Alberni - - - $214,975 $212,054 $427,029
Powell River - - - $19,357 $148,479 $167,836
Quesnel - - - $308,310 $268,901 $577,211
Squamish - - - $571,432 $747,545 $1,318,977
Surrey - $452,791 $818,192 $1,677,526 $1,961,621 $4,910,130
Vancouver $6,891,832 $11,824,700 $13,502,597 $21,064,125 $16,611,057 $69,894,311
Victoria $1,030,769 $2,487,258 $3,964,319 $6,179,448 $5,140,882 $18,802,676
$109,647,199
MANITOBA
22 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Brandon - - - $150,744 $124,281 $275,025
Pine Falls - - - $68,670 $68,867 $137,537
Pine Falls & Selkirk - $26,606 $37,129 $127,261 $130,000 $320,996
Steinbach - - - $64,200 $491,400 $555,600
Winnipeg $1,099,409 $1,607,378 $2,944,375 $4,318,971 $4,991,72 $14,961,861
$16,251,019
NEW BRUNSWICK
6 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Eel Ground - - - - $600,257 $600,257
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Fredericton $238,998 $897,867 $1,502,406 $1,497,195 $1,512,27 $5,648,742
Moncton - - - $422,593 $370,570 $793,163
Saint John $346,367 $208,692 $100,913 $42,530 $352,035 $1,050,537
$8,092,699
NEWFOUNDLAND
11 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Bell Island - - - $281,850 $344,725 $626,575
Clarenville & Bonavista - - - $126,107 $91,373 $217,480
Goose Bay - - - $160,280 $113,869 $274,149
Mount Pearl - - - $12,605 $96,684 $109,289
Nunatsiavut - $97,963 $146,214 $181,214 - $425,391
St. John’s $445,774 $436,774 $250,415 $452,969 $1,421,457 $3,007,389
$4,660,273
NOVA SCOTIA
13 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Cape Breton - - - $356,466 $135,763 $492,229
Halifax - $212,657 $763,109 $1,741,032 $2,702,791 $5,419,589
Kentville - - - $113,500 $57,000 $170,500
Sydney - - - $189,435 $128,611 $318,046
Yarmouth $285,801 $285,801 $208,909 - - $780,511
$7,180,875
NORTHWEST TERRITORIES
3 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Fort McPherson - - - $140,000 $50,278 $190,278
Yellowknife $1,077,873 $328,110 $584,161 $1,564,551 $1,417,051 $4,971,746
$5,162,024
NUNAVUT
1 project from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Hamlet of Pangnirtung - - - - $172,011 $172,011
$172,011
ONTARIO
174 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Aurora - - - $44,037 $329,637 $373,674
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Belleville - - - $59,400 $471,748 $531,148
Birch Island $201,718 $320,770 $263,390 - - $785,878
Bothwell - $169,705 $155,705 $155,703 $155,700 $636,813
Brantford - - $480,521 $811,131 $816,694 $2,108,346
Chatham - - - $46,536 $356,955 $403,491
Concord - - - $427,016 $153,353 $580,369
Garden Village - - - $225,000 $161,606 $386,606
Guelph $50,629 $51,055 $817,265 $2,814,140 $2,201,681 $5,934,770
Hamilton $101,225 - $744,483 $2,330,389 $2,887,625 $6,063,722
Kingston $166,500 - - $983,915 $353,349 $1,503,764
Kitchener - $190,685 $1,058,100 $2,695,310 $2,084,892 $6,028,987
Lanark - $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 - $300,000
Lindsay - - $212,800 $292,887 $359,450 $865,137
London $103,300 $2,064,705 $3,278,128 $5,151,235 $3,140,108 $13,737,476
M’Chigeeng - - $471,019 $1,028,137 $400,000 $1,899,156
Markdale - - - $30,949 $237,394 $268,343
Markham $257,187 - - - - $257,187
Massey - $187,500 $187,500 $187,500 - $562,500
Midland - - - $39,888 $300,982 $340,870
North York - - - $288,589 $195,929 $484,518
Newmarket - $22,689 $99,680 $71,231 - $193,600
North Bay - $136,135 $310,000 $108,865 - $555,000
Ohsweken - $137,077 $342,693 $497,093 $299,722 $1,276,585
Ottawa $5,622,458 $10,855,176 $15,076,379 $21,010,788 $15,600,57 $68,165,371
Owen Sound - - - $982,074 $968,732 $1,950,806
Peterborough $34,045 $626,340 $1,294,654 $2,481,731 $2,314,980 $6,751,750
Sault Ste. Marie $353,470 $342,049 $370,666 $224,685 $56,955 $1,347,825
Scarborough - $158,018 $239,050 $337,306 $414,442 $1,148,816
Shelburne $133,116 $402,011 $909,557 - - $1,444,684
Sioux Lookout - $785,842 $918,696 $918,696 $945,456 $3,568,690
Stony Point - $175,383 $251,592 $269,865 - $696,840
St. Catharines - - - $898,363 $322,626 $1,220,989
Sudbury - - - $439,586 $844,558 $1,284,144
Thornhill - $1,000,000 - - - $1,000,000
Thunder Bay $366,000 $121,447 $123,123 $922,859 $1,099,391 $2,632,820
Toronto $8,682,157 $11,538,682 $12,767,913 $17,534,571 $20,804,173 $71,327,496
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Vaughn $166,500 - - - - $166,500
Waterloo $761,520 $1,392,235 $1,847,133 $1,208,460 $1,177,163 $6,386,511
Wikwemikong $195,486 $195,303 $133,780 $192,119 $103,244 $819,932
$215,991,114
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND
3 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Charlottetown - $86,986 $284,285 $759,495 $425,161 $1,555,927
$1,555,927
QUÉBEC
5 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Gatineau - - - $43,504 $246,763 $290,267
Montreal $25,000 - - $1,595,777 - $1,620,777
Québec $6,108,800 $8,049,055 $9,645,730 $9,028,350 $3,097,307 $35,929,242
(transfer to MSSS)
$37,840,286
SASKATCHEWAN
11 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Nipawing - $123,246 $203,416 $369,001 $40,415 $736,078
Prince Albert $170,253 $304,631 $53,350 $299,052 - $827,286
Regina $720,771 $854,467 $1,091,335 $545,978 $1,128,252 $4,340,803
Saskatoon $480,295 $889,333 $879,005 $3,600,583 $2,179,626 $8,028,842
$13,933,009
YUKON
6 projects from 2019-2024
Municipal Area FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Pelly Crossing - - - $68,311 $776,500 $844,811
Whitehorse $79,350 $173,803 $367,856 $426,768 $287,397 $1,335,174
$2,179,985
e. The following figures show the breakdown of the total funding for each fiscal year, by type of
substance:
Substance FY 19/20 FY 20/21 FY 21/22 FY 22/23 FY 23/24 Total
Alcohol $280,281 $255,302 $1,088,195 $2,101,352 $1,755,300 $5,480,430
Cannabis $12,454,675 $14,899,484 $14,076,909 $9,637,091 $3,374,073 $54,442,232
Methamphetamine $575,021 $2,448,178 $3,416,571 $4,687,784 $3,040,210 $14,167,764
Opioids $14,240,523 $27,534,465 $41,014,157 $68,524,100 $65,421,058 $216,734,303
Tobacco $1,844,429 $3,417,080 $3,522,392 $3,464,880 $3,330,781 $15,579,562
Multiple $8,022,092 $14,600,471 $22,194,795 $51,646,665 $47,448,170 $143,912,193
Total $450,316,484
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-2043 BY
Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake)
DATE
November 30, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the government's Substance Use and Addictions Program and the funding of London
InterCommunity Health Centre (LIHC) program: (a) what criteria has the government established to
measure the success of the LIHC program, and are these success criteria being met; (b) how frequently
does the government receive updates or reports from the LIHC regarding its performance and success in
meeting the specified criteria; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the number of
overdoses increased following the implementation of the program; (d) what is the government’s
explanation for why opioid-related deaths and hospitalizations are greater in the Middlesex—London
area compared to the rest of Ontario; (e) is the government studying or assessing the diversion of drugs
from the LIHC program; (f) what measures are being taken to prevent the diversion of drugs from the
LIHC program; and (g) how is the government educating the public about the harms of diversion?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives (otherwise known as “safer supply”) involves the prescribing of
pharmaceutical-grade drugs as an alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply, with the goal of reducing
overdoses and saving lives. These programs are part of a suite of services for individuals and can also
connect people to other critical services and supports such as:
Primary healthcare
Mental health services
Housing
Job training
Drug treatment for those who are ready.
With regard to questions (a) and (b), above, Health Canada monitors and assesses federally-funded safer
supply pilot programs, including LIHC, in two ways.
First, recipient organizations provide Health Canada project-level reporting. Recipients, including LIHC,
are required to have a Performance Measurement and Evaluation Plan (PME) in place that is used by
Health Canada to monitor and measure the success of their project. The LIHC reports biannually on the
required indicators from their PME plan as part of their progress reports. Within three months from their
project end date, recipients including LIHC, provide a final performance report to Health Canada.
Performance indicators that must be reported on are the following:
SHORT TERM INDICATORS
OUTCOMES
1.1 Primary target population (Canadians or Stakeholders) have access to information on substance use
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a. # of participants reached (by gender, language, age, location or priority population: Indigenous,
2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities) in substance use-related learning opportunities delivered
by SUAP funded project
b. # of primary target population (Canadians or stakeholders) with access to substance use-related
knowledge products developed by SUAP funded project
c. % of primary target population (Canadians or stakeholders) who reported that they gained
knowledge/skills about substances as a result of the SUAP funded project by gender, language, age,
location or priority population: Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities
OUTCOMES
1.2 Increased availability of harm reduction services
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a. # of new services offered by SUAP funded project (including type of service)
b. # of clients accessing services offered by SUAP funded projects (by gender, language, age, location, or
priority population: Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities)
c. # of Naloxone kits distributed by SUAP funded project
MEDIUM TERM INDICATORS
OUTCOMES
2.1 Data and research evidence on drugs, substance use, and emerging drug trends are used by targeted
stakeholders
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a. % of targeted stakeholders who reported that they used knowledge/skills related to substance use
provided by this project to make evidence informed improvements to policies, programs and practice
b. % of targeted stakeholders who reported that they intend to use knowledge/skills provided by this
project to make evidence informed improvements to policies, programs and practice
OUTCOMES
2.2 Reduction in risk-taking behaviour among people with problematic drug and substances use
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
a. % of targeted Canadians who reported that they used knowledge/skills related to substance use
provided by SUAP funded project by gender, language, age, location, or priority population: Indigenous,
2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities)
b. % of targeted Canadians who reported that they intend to use knowledge/skills related to substance
use provided by SUAP funded project (by gender, language, age, location, or priority population:
Indigenous, 2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities)
c. % of clients in SUAP funded treatment and/or harm reduction services projects reporting a positive
behaviour/health outcome by gender, language, age, location, or priority population: Indigenous,
2SLGBTQIA+, Racialized people/communities
Targeted Stakeholders may include other levels of governments, pan-Canadian health organizations,
non-profit organizations, communities or others at the organizational or system level. This relates to
initiatives targeting organization, system or policy and practice change
Targeted Canadians may include youth, adults and any other target groups or sub-populations as
identified by research and evidence. This relates to initiatives targeting individual behaviour change (or
groups of individuals)
Services Categories currently include: harm reduction / outreach; early intervention; treatment (OAT,
iOAT, TiOAT, methamphetamine treatment, nicotine vaping cessation); drug checking; safer supply;
surveillance.
At this time, LIHC is exceeding most of their targets in their PME. Health Canada officials meet every 30
to 60 days with representatives of the LIHC program to discuss workplan activities. Ongoing
communication occurs in between meetings. LIHC has fulfilled reporting requirements on time and is
proactive at communicating important project information as it comes up.
The second manner Health Canada monitors and assesses performance is through information
gathering, research, studies and program evaluations of the pilot projects. These are undertaken by both
Health Canada and independent researchers. The focus of this work is on program operations, barriers
and challenges, and program outcomes (such as reductions in overdoses, improvements in health,
connections to health and social services, impacts on criminal activities associated with substance use,
impacts on healthcare costs, etc.). Health Canada is seeing some promising early outcomes, including
reduced emergency department visits and hospitalizations. We are also hearing reports from safer
supply clients of reduced overdoses, reduced illegal drug use, and reduced criminal activity, along with
improvements to physical and mental health, and better access to wrap-around services like housing and
income supports.
The federal government has supported two assessment and evaluation projects related to the pilot
projects funded through SUAP, in which the LIHC has participated. This includes a preliminary
assessment of 10 pilot projects in Ontario, British Columbia and New Brunswick, and a study being
conducted by a research team from the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). In
addition, external, peer-reviewed and published research, specific to the LIHC safer supply program
demonstrated an attributable decline in emergency department visits and hospital admissions among
program participants.
With regard to questions (c) and (d), above, the scale of the overdose crisis in Canada is unprecedented.
Tragically, the rates of overdose deaths have been increasing in a number of jurisdictions in Canada, the
vast majority of which do not have safer supply programs in place. The toxicity of the illegal drug supply
continues to be a major driver of the overdose crisis. The latest available national data shows that 84%
of all apparent opioid toxicity deaths in the period of January to June 2023 involved fentanyl (an increase
of 47% since 2016) and 80% involved opioids that were only non-pharmaceutical.
Data shows that in Ontario opioid-related deaths and hospitalizations have increased significantly in
recent years, which is consistent with national trends.
Many jurisdictions and municipalities across Ontario have been tragically impacted by the toxicity of the
illegal drug supply, including the Middlesex-London area
The overdose crisis is a complex public health issue that affects each part of the country differently and
can fluctuate over time. As such, changes to death and harm rates in Middlesex-London cannot be
attributed to one specific factor. Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada continue to
monitor and analyze data to better assess impacts and longer-term trends.
Scientific research and evidence show that in order to save lives and protect the health and safety of
Canadians, a comprehensive evidence-based approach that includes a full continuum of supports is
necessary, including harm reduction services as well as treatment, prevention, and enforcement.
Part of this approach includes support for safer supply projects. It should be noted that the reach of
federally-funded safer supply projects is small compared to the total number of people who use drugs in
Canada and who are at risk of overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply. For example, the 29 pilot
projects currently funded by Health Canada have an estimated client base of 4300 people.
With regard to questions (e) and (f), above, Health Canada takes concerns regarding diversion seriously
and monitors for this risk across the supply chain for controlled substances in Canada. At the federal
level, the drugs used in projects offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives are regulated as
controlled substances and are subject to controls under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA)
and its regulations, including laws and regulations around storage, transport, and measures to help
prevent diversion. Programs offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives must also follow
provincial/territorial laws and regulations pertaining to prescribing of pharmaceutical drugs containing
controlled substances. Furthermore, the healthcare providers running the programs are subject to
oversight from their professional regulatory colleges.
In addition, projects offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives have implemented a range of
measures to help prevent diversion and ensure participant and community safety. These include
diversion mitigation protocols, client education around the risks and consequences of diversion, and
monitoring through urine drug screens and other client assessment tools. These activities are often
complemented by comprehensive wrap-around care, client engagement, and requirements around
secure storage.
The LIHC program requires each client to adhere to a set of guidelines in order to participate in the
program. These are outlined during the initial intake and in the Therapeutic Agreement and include
expectations to:
attend weekly appointments with their doctor, submit weekly urine samples and pick up their
medication as directed at their specified pharmacy
be honest with their doctor regarding drug use outside of their Safer Supply prescription
work with outreach workers, care facilitators, and/or systems navigators on social goals (housing, ODSP,
ID, etc.)
not sell or otherwise divert their Safer Supply medication.
In cases where diversion may be suspected, many programs take a progressive mitigation approach that
can be escalated to witnessed dosing, or client discharge/transfer. Diversion represents a reason for
removal from the LIHC Safer Opioid Supply program.
Health Canada is currently assessing the risk mitigation approaches of all federally-funded projects
offering prescribed pharmaceutical alternatives to better understand emerging practices and see if and
where they may be strengthened.
With regard to question (g), above, the Government of Canada takes a number of steps to inform the
public about substance use harms, including risks related to the use of prescription drugs that have been
diverted from their intended use.
Since 2017, over $44M has been committed for prevention and education activities, including, but not
limited to, $22.8M to support public education campaigns, such as:
The Know More Opioids campaign that engages teens and young adults on the facts surrounding
opioids, ways to reduce risks and the harms of stigma. Between April 2018 and November 2023, the
Know More tour had over 178,000 interactions with people through school and festival events and over
1,400 virtual and 380 in-person high school sessions.
The Ease the Burden campaign which seeks to raise awareness and reduce harms associated with the
use of opioids and other substances as well as stigma, especially for men in physically demanding jobs.
Between September 2022 to March 2023, the Ease the Burden webpage exceeded 142.7M views and
views of the campaign video have exceeded over 26.8M.
Health Canada also has a number of resources on its webpage to help inform the public about
prescription drugs and their associated benefits and risks, resources on how to use medications safely,
including advice on proper storage and disposal, which are important steps in reducing the risk of
diversion.
In addition, Health Canada works with industry, regulated health professionals, and provincial regulatory
colleges on how they can help to minimize substances misuse and diversion, including guidance on
reporting a loss or theft.
The overdose crisis is a complex public health issue. Health Canada recognizes that no single organization
or level of government can solve this situation alone. We remain committed to working with a wide
range of partners, including provinces and territories, Indigenous partners, other levels of government,
civil society organizations, direct care providers, researchers, and people with lived and living experience
to support people who use substances, advance solutions to save lives, and help end this national public
health crisis.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-2116 BY
Mr. Johns (Courtenay—Alberni)
DATE
December 12, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), and broken down by
fiscal year since 2021-22: (a) what are the details of all requests for funding from community-led and
not-for-profit organizations, including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester name, (iii) amount of
funding requested, (iv) amount of funding approved; (b) what is the total amount of funding that was
requested by community-led and not-for-profit organizations; (c) what is the total amount of funding
that was provided to community-led and not-for-profit organizations; (d) broken down by level of
government, what are the details of all funding transfers to provincial, territorial, or municipal
governments, including the (i) date of the request, (ii) requester name, (iii) amount of funding requested,
and (iv) amount of funding approved; (e) what is the total amount of funding that was requested by
other levels of government; and (f) what was the total amount of funding provided to other levels of
government?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
a. Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides time-limited grants and
contributions funding that supports evidence-informed initiatives that help to address the overdose
crisis and substance use issues. SUAP received 454 funding requests from fiscal year 2021-2022 to
present. Of these requests, 182 were approved for funding and signed contribution agreements. The
detailed tables below include information on the projects that received funding since fiscal year 2021-
2022.
b. The total amount of funding requested by community-led and not-for-profit organizations, including
other levels of government, since 2021-2022 is $454,538,192.
c. The total amount of funding approved for community-led and not-for-profit organizations, including
other levels of government, since 2021-2022 is $ 211,125,399.
d. The table below includes information on SUAP funding approved for other levels of government
(provincial, territorial, municipal) from fiscal year 2021-2022 to present.
e. SUAP received 34 funding requests from other levels of government in 2021-2022, valued at
$24,560,225. No funding requests from other levels of government were submitted in 2022-2023. SUAP
received one (1) funding request from the Government of Quebec for 2023-2024 valued at $58,198,973.
f. Of the requests received, 25 projects with other levels of government have been funded by SUAP since
2021-2022, with a combined funding value of $76,064,814.
A summary of SUAP funding approved for other levels of government is included in the detailed table
below.
Note: Due to the principles set out in the Access to Information Act and the Privacy Act on protecting
sensitive, third-party data, the tables below do not include the date of the request, requester name and
amount of funding requested for applicants, including other levels of government, that were not
approved for SUAP funding. The amount of funding requested for each of the organizations that were
not approved for funding is information of business value that cannot be released without the written
consent of those organizations.
Note also that the 2023 SUAP Call for Proposals ended on November 22, 2023 and is still being
processed. Information on the proposals received and funded is not yet available.
SUAP Funding Summary
(Note: This table excludes funding to other levels of government)
Fiscal Year 2021-2022
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
1 Addiction Services Central Ontario 2021-09-24 $692,419
2 AIDS Committee of Newfoundland & Labrador Inc. 2021-09-24 $217,480
3 Alberni Valley Drug and Alcohol Prevention Services Society 2021-09-24 $427,029
4 Alberta Alliance Who Educates and Advocates Responsibly Society 2021-09-24 $790,927
5 Ally Centre of Cape Breton 2021-09-24 $318,046
6 Atira Women's Resource Society 2021-09-24 $656,786
7 AVI Health and Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $1,565,776
8 AVI Health and Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $3,024,675
9 AVI Health and Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $456,331
10 BC Yukon Association of Drug War Survivors 2021-09-24 $380,365
11 Bell Island Sobriety, Housing and Employment Inc. 2021-09-24 $626,575
12 Belleville and Quinte West Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $937,491
13 Black Coalition for AIDS Prevention of Metropolitan Toronto 2021-09-24 $321,516
14 Blood Ties Four Directions Centre Society 2021-09-24 $257,368
15 Board of Education of School District No. 62 (Sooke) 2021-09-24 $120,930
16 Burnaby Family Life Institute 2021-09-24 $135,029
17 Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance 2021-09-24 $597,488
18 Canadian AIDS Treatment Information Exchange 2021-09-24 $322,410
19 Canadian Apprenticeship Forum 2021-09-24 $629,590
20 Canadian Association of People Who Use Drugs 2021-03-17 $1,665,761
21 Canadian Mental Health Association Waterloo Wellington Branch 2021-09-24 $163,775
22 Cape Breton Association of People Empowering Drug Users 2021-09-24 $492,229
23 Centre for ADD/ADHD Awareness Canada 2021-09-24 $183,890
24 Centre for Addiction and Mental Health 2021-09-24 $2,251,794
25 Centre for Addiction and Mental Health 2021-09-24 $841,212
26 Centre for Effective Practice 2021-06-17 $895,288
27 Centre of Excellence for Women’s Health 2021-06-16 $708,129
28 Centretown Community Health Centre Inc. 2021-09-24 $1,353,365
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
29 Christie Ossington Neighbourhood Centre 2021-09-24 $380,845
30 CHUM / Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse - Quebec-Atlantic
2021-09-24 $1,595,777
31 Community Justice Initiatives (Waterloo Region Crime Prevention Council)
2021-06-18 $378,763
32 Community-Based Research Centre Society 2021-06-17 $434,533
33 Comox Bay Care Society 2021-09-24 $140,000
34 Connective Support Society 2021-09-24 $144,429
35 Covenant Health 2021-09-24 $957,069
36 CUPS Calgary Society 2021-09-24 $1,213,961
37 Dalhousie University (Solutions for Kids in Pain) 2021-09-24 $613,062
38 Dan's Legacy Foundation 2021-09-24 $2,505,185
39 Digital Public Square 2021-09-24 $1,343,704
40 Downtown Eastside Women’s Centre Association 2021-09-24 $144,429
41 Dr. Peter AIDS Foundation (Canadian Aboriginal AIDS Network) 2021-06-15 $1,891,529
42 Elizabeth Fry Society of Ottawa 2021-09-24 $884,371
43 Elizabeth Fry Society of Peterborough 2021-09-24 $432,820
44 First Light St. John's Friendship Centre 2021-09-24 $375,688
45 Fort McMurray 468 First Nation 2021-09-24 $740,359
46 Fraser House Society 2021-09-24 $294,808
47 Georgian Bay Native Women's Association 2021-09-24 $374,827
48 Gitpo Spirit Lodge 2021-09-24 $1,193,514
49 Go-Give Project 2021-09-24 $938,417
50 Grand River Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $792,148
51 Grey Bruce Health Services 2021-09-24 $1,950,806
52 Hamilton Police Service 2021-09-24 $207,561
53 Hamilton Urban Core Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $2,476,623
54 Hamsmart Community Health Collective 2021-09-24 $428,100
55 Inner City Family Health Team 2021-09-24 $992,114
56 Jean Tweed Treatment Centre 2021-09-24 $805,534
57 Kainai Food Bank Society 2021-09-24 $1,155,145
58 Kee Tas Kee Now Tribal Council 2021-09-24 $148,809
59 Lawson Research Institute 2021-09-24 $509,376
60 L'Espoir de la Femme Immigrante 2021-09-24 $258,736
61 Lift Community Services of Qathet Society 2021-09-24 $295,735
62 Lookout Housing and Health Society 2021-09-24 $824,766
63 Main Street Project 2021-09-24 $802,096
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
64 Manitoba Metis Federation 2021-09-24 $1,917,838
65 McMaster University (Michael G. DeGroote National Pain Centre)
2021-09-24 $636,973
66 Memorial University of Newfoundland and Labrador 2021-09-24 $282,840
67 Métis Nation British Columbia 2021-09-24 $374,716
68 Mi’kmaw Native Friendship Society 2021-06-16 $380,978
69 Mi’kmaw Native Friendship Society 2021-09-24 $292,440
70 Mi’kmaw Native Friendship Society 2021-09-24 $958,317
71 Midaynta Community Services 2021-09-24 $484,518
72 Native Child and Family Services of Toronto 2021-09-24 $474,272
73 Native Women's Association of Canada 2021-09-24 $534,760
74 Neighbourhood Group Community Services 2021-09-24 $1,236,700
75 Nipissing First Nation Indian Band 2021-09-24 $386,606
76 Nisga'a Ts'amiks Vancouver Society 2021-09-24 $329,316
77 Northeast Addiction and Mental Health Centre for Holistic Recovery
2021-09-24 $729,001
78 Northern Network of Peers for Equality 2021-09-24 $577,211
79 Northreach Society 2021-09-24 $1,835,450
80 Norwest Community Health Centres 2021-09-24 $2,022,250
81 Operation Come Home 2021-09-24 $359,396
82 Options Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $2,579,088
83 Ottawa Hospital Research Institute 2021-09-24 $1,254,264
84 P.E.E.R.S. Alliance Inc. 2021-09-24 $430,818
85 Pacifica Treatment Centre Society 2021-09-24 $674,828
86 Pain BC Society 2021-09-24 $522,244
87 Patient/Client & Family Council 2021-09-24 $229,636
88 Persons Living With AIDS Network of Saskatchewan Inc. 2021-09-24 $125,991
89 Peterborough AIDS Resource Network 2021-09-24 $540,342
90 PHS Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $1,149,012
91 Possibilities Recovery Center Inc. 2021-09-24 $696,441
92 St. John Ambulance 2021-09-24 $872,455
93 Providence Health Care Research Institute Trust 2021-09-24 $667,527
94 Providence Health Care Society (BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS)
2021-09-24 $2,116,854
95 Providing Advocacy Counseling and Education Society 2021-09-24 $378,266
96 R.E.C.A.P. Health Services Inc 2021-09-24 $678,190
97 Reach Out Chatham-Kent Missions 2021-09-24 $710,969
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
98 Regional Essential Access to Connected Healthcare, Niagara Inc. 2021-09-24 1,513,594
99 Research St. Joseph's - Hamilton 2021-09-24 $1,235,383
100 Réseau ACCESS Network 2021-09-24 $751,643
101 Royal Alexandra Hospital Foundation 2021-09-24 $1,894,417
102 Royal Alexandra Hospital Foundation 2021-06-17 $1,132,197
103 Sacred Circle Indigenous Wellness Society 2021-09-24 $1,963,855
104 SafeLink Alberta Society 2021-09-24 $129,190
105 Salvus Clinic Inc. 2021-09-24 $793,163
106 Sanguen Health Centre Foundation 2021-09-24 $325,511
107 Saskatchewan Fetal Alcohol Support Network Inc. 2021-09-24 $873,750
108 Schizophrenia Society of Canada 2021-09-24 $978,000
109 Sea to Sky Community Services Society 2021-09-24 $873,039
110 Selkirk First Nation 2021-09-24 $1,749,111
111 Sexuality Education Resource Centre Manitoba Inc. 2021-09-24 $275,025
112 Sherbourne Health Centre Corporation 2021-09-24 $1,049,329
113 Simon Fraser University 2021-09-24 $592,157
114 Simon Fraser University 2021-09-24 $472,235
115 Six Nations of the Grand River 2021-09-24 $454,122
116 Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada 2021-09-24 $526,134
117 South East Grey Community Health Center 2021-09-24 $472,832
118 South Okanagan Women In Need Society 2021-09-24 $341,322
119 South Riverdale Community Health Centre 2021-09-24 $472,043
120 Southeast Resource Development Council Corp. 2021-09-24 $782,201
121 Squamish Helping Hands Society 2021-09-24 $785,762
122 St. Boniface Hospital 2021-09-24 $135,000
123 St. Boniface Street Links 2021-09-24 $399,828
124 St. Paul's Foundation of Vancouver 2021-09-24 $433,416
125 St. Paul's Foundation of Vancouver 2021-09-24 $831,170
126 STC Health and Family Services Inc 2021-09-24 $3,238,943
127 Stonehenge Therapeutic Community 2021-09-24 $256,204
128 Stoney Trail Wellness Center Eden Valley 2021-09-24 $1,400,040
129 Sts’ailes 2021-09-24 $488,288
130 Students Commission of Canada 2021-09-24 $410,075
131 Sunshine House Inc. 2021-09-24 $458,065
132 The AIDS Network (TAN) 2021-09-24 $759,164
133 Tl'oondih Healing Society 2021-09-24 $205,361
134 Trellis HIV & Community Care (HIV/AIDS Regional Services) 2021-09-24 $1,337,264
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
135 Unity Health Toronto 2021-06-17 $854,439
136 Unity Health Toronto 2021-09-24 $257,452
137 University Health Network 2021-09-24 $1,658,354
138 University of British Columbia 2021-09-24 $748,328
139 University of British Columbia 2021-09-24 $1,380,237
140 University of British Columbia 2021-06-16 443,262
141 University of Toronto 2021-09-24 $470,027
142 University of Victoria (Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research)
2021-06-17 $3,282,356
143 University of Victoria (Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research) (CAPE)
2021-06-17 $1,962,869
144 University of Western Ontario 2021-09-24 $1,995,775
145 Vasantham - A Tamil Seniors Wellness Centre Inc. 2021-09-24 $188,374
146 Wanasah - Mental Health Services for Black Youth 2021-09-24 $340,439
147 West Broadway Development Corporation 2021-09-24 $134,360
148 Wings of Power Inc. 2021-09-24 $137,537
149 Women's Hostels Inc 2021-09-24 $620,701
150 World Spine Care - Canada 2021-09-24 $580,369
151 Wyndham House Inc. 2021-09-24 $1,247,203
152 YMCA of Greater Toronto 2021-09-24 $1,325,154
TOTAL: $125,515,889
Fiscal Year 2022-2023
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
1 Alberta Community Council on HIV 2022-07-04 $4,000,000
2 Centre for Addiction and Mental Health 2022-08-08 $1,199,492
3 Coalition of Substance Users of the North Society 2022-06-02 457,204
4 Unity Health Toronto - Providence St. Joseph’s and St. Michael’s Healthcare
(St. Michael's Hospital - Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute) 2022-10-27 $2,000,000
TOTAL: $7,656,696
Fiscal Year 2023-2024
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
1 Simon Fraser University (Canadian Drug Policy Coalition) 2023-05-05 $1,888,000
TOTAL: $1,888,000
SUAP Funding Summary – Other Levels of Government
Fiscal Year 2021-2022
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
Provincial
1 Government of Newfoundland and Labrador 2021-09-24 $1,287,605
SUBTOTAL: $1,287,605
Provincial (Health Authorities)
2 Alberta Health Services 2021-09-24 $1,146,909
3 Alberta Health Services 2021-09-24 $196,754
4 Eastern Regional Health Authority (NL) 2021-09-24 $192,572
5 Eastern Regional Health Authority (NL) 2021-09-24 $335,422
6 Fraser Health Authority 2021-09-24 $519,768
7 Fraser Health Authority 2021-09-24 $147,613
8 Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $595,175
9 Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $290,500
10 Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $293,400
11 Nova Scotia Health Authority 2021-09-24 $170,500
12 Provincial Health Services Authority (BC) 2021-09-24 $1,734,844
13 Saskatchewan Health Authority 2021-09-24 $1,719,392
14 Shared Health (Manitoba) 2021-09-24 $1,108,693
SUBTOTAL: $8,451,542
Territorial
15 Government of the Northwest Territories 2021-09-24 $2,981,602
16 Government of Yukon 2021-09-24 $78,693
17 Government of Yukon 2021-09-24 $361,238
SUBTOTAL: $3,421,533
Regional
18 Nunatsiavut Government 2021-09-24 $274,149
19 Four Arrows Regional Health Authority 2021-09-24 $1,539,032
20 Vancouver Coastal Health Authority 2021-09-24 $1,172,775
SUBTOTAL: $2,985,956
Municipal
21 City of Hamilton 2021-09-24 $287,551
22 City of Kelowna 2021-09-24 $754,438
23 City of Surrey 2021-09-24 $505,205
24 Hamlet of Pangnirtung 2021-09-24 $172,011
SUBTOTAL: $1,719,205
TOTAL: $15,154,034
Fiscal Year 2022-2023
Nil
Fiscal Year 2023-2024
Organization Date Proposal Submitted Total Funding Approved
Provincial
1 Government of Quebec N/A $58,198,973
SUBTOTAL: $58,198,973
TOTAL: $58,198,973
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-2190 BY
Mrs. Goodridge (Fort McMurray—Cold Lake)
DATE
December 13, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to meetings involving the government about safe supply, safer supply, pharmaceutical
alternatives to the toxic, illegal or illicit drug supply, pharmaceutical grade medication as an alternative
to the toxic, illegal or illicit drug supply, and medications for substance use disorder and to provide
pharmaceutical alternatives to the contaminated illegal or illicit drug supply: what are the details of
meetings over the last five years between government and pharmaceutical companies, government and
opioid manufacturers, government and lobby companies, and government and stakeholders, including,
for each, the (i) date, (ii) location, (iii) type and purpose of the meeting, (iv) names of the organizations
represented, (v) names and titles of the individuals in attendance, including both government officials
and other attendees?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
Producing a comprehensive response to this question required the manual collection and analysis of a
significant volume of information. In the time allotted, and considering the broad scope of the request,
the below reflects the best and most complete information available at the time of the search.
i. Date
December 8, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: stakeholder meeting
Purpose: opportunity to hear from stakeholder
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
British Columbia Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU)
v. Participants
Representative from BCCSU
Carol Anne Chenard (DG)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
i. Date
December 5, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: opportunity to hear from stakeholder
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Ottawa Hospital Substance Use Program
v. Participants
Physician from Ottawa Hospital
Carol Anne Chenard (DG)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
i. Date
November 29, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Presentation
Purpose: present findings from research “Safer Opioid supply: A rapid review of the evidence”
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Ontario Drug Policy Research Network (ODPRN)
Representatives from ODPRN
Representatives from Health Canada including Julie Hartleib (Director), and a number of managers and
analysts
i. Date
October 31, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss work by BCCSU and BC Provincial Health Officer on prescribed safer supply
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
British Columbia Centre for Substance Use (BCCSU)
v. Participants
Eric Costen (HC – AsDM)
Kendal Weber (HC – ADM)
Jennifer Saxe (HC – AsADM)
Dr. Theresa Tam (PHAC – Chief Public Health Officer)
Provincial Health Officer
Representatives from BCCSU
i. Date
October 16, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: to discuss research and evaluation of safer supply
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Centre on Drug Policy Evaluation (CDPE)
v. Participants
Representative from CDPE
Sheri Todd (DG)
Tammy Simpson (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Representative from CIHR
i. Date
September 18, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Update on research work, including opioid use disorder guidance, safer supply, prevention
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM)
v. Participants
Eric Costen (HC – AsDM)
Kendal Weber (HC – ADM)
Jennifer Saxe (HC – AsADM)
Representatives from CIHR
Officials from CRISM
i. Date
September 15, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work to create a facility to manufacture pharmaceutical
substances.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
v. Participants
Representatives from Fair Price Pharma
Participation from Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry’s Office
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
i. Date
September 12, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To visit the site and discuss the services provided.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
London InterCommunity Health Centre
v. Participants
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
i. Date
August 29, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Introductory meeting
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
v. Participants
Representatives of Moms Stop the Harm
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
i. Date
August 28, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Opportunity to hear from stakeholders
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
NorWest Community Health Centres
v. Participants
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Stephen Lucas, Health Canada
i. Date
August 9, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To learn about their SAFER (Safer Alternative for Emergency Response) program
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
PHS Community Services Society
Participants
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Eric Costen, Health Canada
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
i. Date
August 9, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about Hope to Health’s approach to care, including safer supply and primary care
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
v. Participants
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Eric Costen
Representatives from the BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
i. Date
July 25, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Roundtable meeting
Purpose: To discuss their policy brief, “Innovating Beyond Exclusively Medicalized Approaches”
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Civil Society Advancing Safe Supply Working Group
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from Health Canada
Representative from the Harm Reduction Nurses Association
Representative from Moms Stop the Harm
Representative from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Representative from Boyle Street Community Services Society
i. Date
July 4, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
v. Participants
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
i. Date
June 13, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the Prescribed Safer Supply Emerging Evidence Brief
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
National Safer Supply Community of Practice
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representative from Parkdale Queen West Community Health Centre
Representative from South Riverdale Community Health Centre
Representative from the London InterCommunity Health Centre
Representative from the Canadian Institute for Substance Use Research
Representative from the National Safer Supply Community of Practice
Shannon Nix, Health Canada
Local Members of Parliament
i. Date
June 8, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: to discuss the status of their work
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
British Columbia Centre for Disease Control (BCCDC)
v. Participants
Representatives from BCCDC
Jen Saxe (DG)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
i. Date
May 31, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
i. Date
May 30, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
c
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To meet with Moms Stop the Harm members visiting Ottawa
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Representatives from Moms Stop the Harm
i. Date
May 18, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Follow up meeting
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Shannon Nix – Health Canada Associate ADM
i. Date
May 16, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
i. Date
May 10, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Virtual Exchange Forum
Purpose: To discuss an “Evaluation of Harm Reduction Approaches to Address the Opioid Crisis in the
Context of COVID-19 – Safer Supply Evaluation”
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
v. Participants
Representatives from CIHR
Representatives from Health Canada
Researchers and safer supply service providers
i. Date
April 24, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss safer supply
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
London InterCommunity Health Centre
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from London InterCommunity Health Centre
i. Date
February 16, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss the status of their work
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participation from Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
i. Date
February 15, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about Pathways to Recovery’s safer supply program
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Pathways to Recovery
Safer Supply Ottawa
Recovery Care
Options Bytown
Ottawa Inner City Health
Somerset West Community Health Centre
Respect Rx
Sandy Hill Community Health Centre
Ottawa Public Health
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Former President of the Treasury Board
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. ADM)
Representative from Pathways to Recovery
Representatives from Recovery Care
Representatives from Options Bytown
Representatives from Safer Supply Ottawa
Representative from Ottawa Inner City Health
Representatives from Somerset West Community Health Centre
Representative from Respect Rx
Representative from Sandy Hill Community Health Centre
Representatives from Ottawa Public Health
i. Date
February 10, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss LIHC’s safer supply project
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
London InterCommunity Health Centre
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from London InterCommunity Health Centre
Local Member of Parliament
Shannon Nix, Health Canada
i. Date
February 2, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To discuss SUAP safer supply projects.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Parkdale Queen West Community Health Centre
South Riverdale Community Health Centre
London InterCommunity Health Centre
National Safer Supply Community of Practice
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Local Member of Parliament
Parkdale Queen West Community Health
South Riverdale Community Health Centre
London InterCommunity Health Centre
National Safer Supply Community of Practice
i. Date
January 12, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about the Tablet Injectable Opioid Agonist Therapy (TiOAT) service in Cowichan
Valley
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Island Health
Lookout Health and Housing Society
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
Representatives from Island Health
Representatives from Lookout Health and Housing Society
i. Date
January 11, 2023
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site Visit
Purpose: To learn more about Hope to Health’s approach to care, including safer supply and primary care
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. ADM)
Representatives from the BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS
i. Date
November 22, 2022
November 8, 2022
October 27, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Knowledge Exchange Series (KES) on Safer Supply
Purpose: To hear from a range of participants on the current evidence and knowledge around safer
supply, share experiences of what is or is not working well, and discuss how current research and
knowledge can be used to design new models and services while reducing risks or unintended results
from these programs.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Expert Advisory Group on Safer Supply (EAG)
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Committee on Substance Use
Canadian Centre for Substance Use and Addiction (CCSA)
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions (attended Oct 27 and Nov 22)
Range of invited presenters, panellists, and participants, including researchers, safer supply prescribers
and clients, national drug policy organizations, and PWLLE
A number of observers also attended from Health Canada's Expert Advisory Group on Safer Supply, the
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Committee on Substance Use, CCSA, Indigenous Services Canada, and the
Canadian Institutes for Health Research.
i. Date
October 6, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up discussion
Purpose: To discuss ongoing work by the BCCSU related to models of medication distribution for those at
risk of overdose in BC.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
BC Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU)
v. Participants
Jennifer Saxe (HC-Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (HC-Director)
Sheri Todd (HC-DG)
Tammy Simpson (HC-Director)
Cesare Spadaccini (HC – Manager)
Anna Roberts (HC – Manager)
Representative from BCCSU
i. Date
September 14, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up meeting with pharmaceutical company
Purpose: To discuss diacetylmorphine availability in Canada
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Pharmascience
v. Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Jennifer Novak (Executive Director)
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Michele Musgrove (Manager)
Representatives from Pharmascience
i. Date
August 30, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Roundtable
Purpose: To discuss overdose prevention in Canada and Australia
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Pennington Institute
Ottawa Inner City Health
v. Participants
Representative from the Senate
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from the Pennington Institute
Representative from Ottawa Inner City Health
Representatives from health Canada: Shannon Nix (As ADM); Jennifer Saxe (DG); Peggy Ainslie (Director)
i. Date
August 29. 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Roundtable
Purpose: Follow up to meeting on July 27, 2022.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
Canadian Association of People Who Use Drugs
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Representative from Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Representative from VANDU
Representative from DULF
Representative from the Harm Reduction Nurses Association
Representatives from health Canada: Shannon Nix (As ADM); Jennifer Saxe (DG); Peggy Ainslie (Director)
i. Date
July 27, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Roundtable
Purpose: Follow up meeting to the Non-Medicalized Safe Supply Roundtable on March 10, 2022
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Prairie Harm Reduction
VANDU
DULF
Harm Reduction Nurses Association
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Representatives from Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Representative from Prairie Harm Reduction
Representatives from the Canadian Association of People Who Use Drugs (CAPUD)
Representative from VANDU
Representative from DULF
Representative from the Harm
Reduction Nurses Association
i. Date
June 27, 2022,
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up meeting with pharmaceutical company
Purpose: To discuss diacetylmorphine availablity in Canada
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Pharmascience
v. Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General
Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Jennifer Novak (Executive Director)
Carol Anne Chenard HC- (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Representatives from Pharmascience
i. Date
June 17, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up discussion
Purpose: To discuss ongoing work by the BCCSU related to models of medication distribution for those at
risk of overdose in BC.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
BC Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU)
v. Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Sheri Todd (Director General)
Tammy Simpson (Director)
Anna Roberts (Manager)
Representative from BCCSU
i. Date
April 19, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder Meeting
Purpose: To visit the site and discuss the services provided.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
London InterCommunity Health Centre
v. Participants
Not available
i. Date
April 11, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Follow-up discussion
Purpose: To discuss a request for an S. 56 exemption for a safe supply fulfillment centre and compassion
club.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Drug User Liberation Front (DULF)
Vancouver Area Network of Drug Users (VANDU)
v. Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Anna Roberts (Manager)
Representative from DULF
Representatives from VANDU
i. Date
April 9, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To learn about their SAFER Initiative
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
AVI Health and Community Services SAFER Initiative
v. Participants
Representatives from AVI Health and Community Services
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister )
i. Date
April 8, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: Introductory meeting
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
PHS Community Services Society
v. Participants
Representatives from PHS Community Services Society
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
i. Date
April 8, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
In Person
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Site visit
Purpose: To see a machine and hear about MySafe’s work.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
MySafe
v. Participants
Representatives from MySafe
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
•Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
i. Date
March 10, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Ministerial Roundtable with Moms Stop the Harm and the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Purpose: To better understand the drivers for safer supply, potential risks related to different service
provision models and which have proven to be most effective, and remaining barriers to expanding the
most effective models for safer supply.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Moms Stop the Harm
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Former Parliamentary Secretary to former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions Office
Representatives from Moms Stop the Harm
Representatives from the Canadian Drug Policy Coalition
Health Canada: Shannon Nix (As. Assistant Deputy Minister)
i. Date
March 2, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Webinar
Purpose: To deliver remarks at the Canadian Pharmacists Association Webinar on Safer Supply
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Pharmacists Association
v. Participants
Members of the Canadian Pharmacists Association
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
i. Date
February 23, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Ministerial Roundtable with Expert Advisory Body
Purpose: To better understand the drivers for safer supply, potential risks related to different service
provision models and which have proven to be most effective, and remaining barriers to expanding the
most effective models for safer supply.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Expert Advisory Group on Safer Supply (EAG)
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Participants from former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ Office
Participant from the Prime Minister’s Office
Former Parliamentary Secretary to Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
Representatives from the Government of British Columbia, including the Honourable Sheila Malcolmson
Health Canada: Jennifer Saxe (Director General), Jennifer Pelley (Director), Julie Hartlieb (Director), Sheri
Todd (Director General), Ian Hodges (Manager), Saskia Vanderloo (Policy Analyst), Rachel Joyce Hayton
(Policy Analyst)
EAG members
i. Date
February 22, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Meeting with pharmaceutical company
Purpose: To discuss diacetylmorphine availability in Canada
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Pharmascience
v. Participants
Jen Saxe (Director General)
Jennifer Pelley (Director)
Jennifer Novak (Executive Director)
Carol Anne Chenard (Director)
Julie Hartleib (Director)
Representatives from Pharmascience
i. Date
February 3, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Health Canada People with Lived and Living Experience (PWLLE) Council Meeting with Minister
Bennett
Purpose: For the Minister to meet the members of Health Canada’s PWLLE Council and learn more about
their priorities as outlined in a Discussion Paper, one of which is diversification of Safe Supply.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
PWLLE represent themselves and not their organization as Council Members.
v. Participants
Former Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
PWLLE Council Members
Health Canada participants, including: Kendal Weber (Assistant Deputy Minister), Shannon Nix, (As.
Assistant Deputy Minister), Jennifer Novak (Executive Director), Sheri Todd (Director General), Jennifer
Saxe (Director General), Tammy Simpson (Director), Jennifer Pelley (Director)
i. Date
December 6, 2021
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Stakeholder meeting
Purpose: To learn more about iOAT and work of Dr. Peter Centre
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Dr Peter Centre
v. Participants
Jennifer Saxe (HC-Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (HC-Director)
Jennifer Pelley (HC –Director)
Representatives from Dr. Peter Centre
i. Date
November 18, 2021
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Meeting with Canadian Pharmacist Association
Purpose: To discuss role of pharmacists in safer supply
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Pharmacist Association (CPHA)
v. Participants
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Jo-Ann Purcell (HC – Director)
Representatives from CPHA
i. Date
February 15, 2021
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Meeting with Stakeholder
Purpose: Introductory meeting
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Canadian Association for Safe Supply (CASS)
v. Participants
Jennifer Saxe (HC - Director General)
Michelle Boudreau (HC - Director General)
Representative from CASS
i. Date
February 5, 2021
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Webinar
Purpose: To provide an overview of the 6 national guidance documents developed by the Canadian
Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) that address the urgent needs of people who use
substances, as well as service providers and decision makers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other rapid response projects related to substance use and COVID-19 were also discussed, such as the
qualitative survey of the impact of COVID-19 on People with Living Experience of Drug Use.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Representatives from a range of organizations, including:
Provinces and Territories
Federal departments and agencies
Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM)
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
v. Participants
Representative from CRISM
Jennifer Saxe (Director General)
Bruna Brands (HC - Senior Science Advisor)
Representatives from provincial and territorial governments
*An invitation to this webinar was extended to nearly 400 individuals and there was no record of
attendance. As such we cannot confirm the number or names of participants.
i. Date
January 11, 2021
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Meeting with Stakeholder
Purpose: To discuss work by the BCCSU related to models of medication distribution for those at risk of
overdose in BC.
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
British Columbia Centre for Substance Use (BCCSU)
v. Participants
Eric Costen (HC – AsADM)
Jennifer Saxe (HC-Director General)
Carol Anne Chenard (HC-Director)
Jennifer Novak (HC – Executive Director)
Tammy Simpson (HC-Director)
Representative from BCCSU
i. Date
April 26, 2021
January 20, 2022
January 26, 2022
January 31, 2022
June 16, 2022
October 18, 2022
November 4, 2022
November 11, 2022
ii. Location (virtual/in-person)
Virtual
iii. Meeting Type and Meeting Purpose
Type: Meeting with Stakeholder
Purpose: To discuss regulatory pathways regarding diacetylmorphine
iv. Names of Organizations Represented
Fair Price Pharma
v. Participants
Representatives from Fair Price Pharma
Representatives from Health Canada (Jennifer Saxe, Director General, Carol Anne Chenard, Director)
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-2204 BY
Mr. Davies (Vancouver Kingsway)
DATE
December 14, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to the federal tobacco control strategy for fiscal year 2022-23: (a) what was the budget for
the strategy; (b) how much of that budget was spent within each fiscal year; (c) how much was spent on
each component of the strategy, specifically (i) mass media, (ii) policy and regulatory development, (iii)
research, (iv) surveillance, (v) enforcement, (vi) grants and contributions, (vii) programs for Indigenous
Canadians; (d) were any other activities not listed in (c) funded by the strategy, and, if so, how much was
spent on each of these activities; and (e) was part of the budget reallocated for purposes other than
tobacco control, and, if so, how much was reallocated?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada / Public Health Agency of Canada
In May 2018, the Government of Canada launched Canada’s Tobacco Strategy (CTS) with the goal of
achieving less than 5% tobacco use by 2035. The main themes of the CTS are to: help Canadians quit
tobacco; protect young people and non-tobacco users from nicotine addiction; strengthen our
foundations in science, surveillance, and partnerships; and co-develop distinctions-based approaches
with Indigenous peoples.
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) activities contribute to these themes and
comprise policy and regulatory development, compliance and enforcement, science, research and
surveillance, public education, international activities and funded and non-funded collaborations with
partners, including the provinces and territories, Indigenous organizations, municipalities, non-
governmental organizations, health care professionals and the academic sector
a. Health Canada and the PHAC portion of the CTS budget was $46.2M for fiscal year 2022-23.
b. $48.6M was spent by Health Canada and the PHAC within fiscal year 2022-23. Note: Surplus from
other program areas was used for additional costs incurred in 2022-23.
c. CTS expenditures by Health Canada and the PHAC for 2022-23 are as follows: CTS 2022-23 expenditure
for (c)1
i. Mass media $0.8M
ii. Policy and regulatory development $11M
iii. Research $3.0M
iv. Surveillance $3.2M
v. Enforcement2 $6.6M
vi. Grants and contributions $8.5M
vii. Programs for Indigenous Canadians N/A for Health Canada - Indigenous Services Canada and Crown-
Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs to respond
1. This table includes both tobacco and vaping funds under the CTS.
2. This figure includes expenditures for both compliance and enforcement.
d. The following additional Health Canada and PHAC expenditures were funded by the strategy incurring
a total of $15.5M in 2022-23:
2022-23 additional expenditure for (d)1
i. legal services and administrative costs including legal drafting and litigation; evaluations; information
management; administrative and financial support; and branch corporate charges $4.9M
ii. departmental corporate costs $5.5M
iii. lab testing, risk assessment, and external relations $1.1M
iv. program costs, including funding to provinces and territories to support quitline services, and salaries
associated with supporting public education and program delivery $4.0M
1. This table includes both tobacco and vaping funds under the CTS.
e. In 2022-23, no part of Health Canada or PHAC budgets was reallocated for purposes other than
tobacco control.
