Created: 2024-05-08T14:02:25.922296
Name: Summary_Safety_Review_-_Trifecta_Heart_Valve_-_Assessing_the_Potential_Risk_of_Early_Wear
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/medeffect-canada/safety-reviews/summary-safety-review-trifecta-heart-valve-assessing-potential-risk.html
Package ID: f9d24443-8ff4-4648-aa03-ccc5be9af052
Keywords: ['Summary Safety Review', 'Trifecta', 'Heart Valve', 'assessing', 'potential risk', 'Early Wear', 'heart valve implant', 'stress on heart', 'patient', 'undergo surgery', 'invasive procedure']
Notes: After reviewing an article about the wearing out of the Trifecta heart valve 34 months after it was implanted in a patient, Health Canada carried out a safety review of related patient reports both in Canada and internationally. When a heart valve implant does not function properly it can place stress on the heart and a patient typically has to undergo surgery or an invasive procedure to have the valve repaired or replaced.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Summary Safety Review - Trifecta Heart Valve - Assessing the Potential Risk of Early Wear - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Skip to section menu Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Drugs and health products MedEffect Canada Safety Reviews Summary Safety Review - Trifecta Heart Valve - Assessing the Potential Risk of Early Wear August 15, 2016 Product Trifecta heart valve manufactured by St. Jude Medical Potential Safety Issue Early wear (structural valve deterioration) Key Messages Trifecta is an artificial valve that is placed in the heart (an implanted device) when patients require replacement of a diseased, damaged, or malfunctioning aortic heart valve. Health Canada's safety review was triggered by a published report that described the wearing out (structural valve deterioration) of a patient's Trifecta valve approximately 3 years after it was placed in the heart, which is earlier than expected. In carrying out this safety review, Health Canada determined that there was not enough long-term evidence available to make changes to the product information at this time. Health Canada will continue to monitor safety information including the manufacturer's 10-year long patient studies and other patient safety reports on an annual basis regarding the Trifecta heart valve. Overview After reviewing an article about the wearing out of the Trifecta heart valve 34 months after it was implanted in a patientFootnote 1, Health Canada carried out a safety review of related patient reports both in Canada and internationally. When a heart valve implant does not function properly it can place stress on the heart and a patient typically has to undergo surgery or an invasive procedure to have the valve repaired or replaced. Use in Canada The Trifecta heart valve is an artificial aortic heart valve (pericardial aortic, supra annular, stented tissue valve) that has been designed to closely resemble the same valve in a human. It is made, in part, from pig and cow heart tissue that has been prepared for human use. This device is meant to be a replacement for a diseased, damaged, or malfunctioning aortic heart valve or as a replacement for a previously implanted aortic prosthetic heart valve. The Trifecta valve was first licensed in Canada in October 2010 and is manufactured by St. Jude Medical. From January 2010 to August 2015, over 125,000 of these valves were sold worldwide and 3,500 of these were sold in Canada. Safety Review Findings At the time of the review, Health Canada had received a total of 13 case reports related to the wearing out (structural valve deterioration) of the Trifecta valve. The reports describe patients that had the device implanted in their heart for 1.5 to 6 years. Information received from the manufacturer describes 117 cases of potential structural valve deterioration of this device from January 2010 to August 2015, world-wide. The number of complaints of early wear for the Trifecta valve (about 1 report for every 1,000 valves implanted) is comparable to valves of the same type. The scientific literature explains that, when implanted in patients older than 65 years, artificial heart valves made of animal tissues are generally expected to last approximately 10 to 15 years.Footnote 2,Footnote 3 There is limited information about the long-term durability of the Trifecta valve because the product has only been on the market in Canada since 2010. The manufacturer started two long-term studies to monitor the safety of this valve in a group of patients. The "Trifecta Durability Study" has been ongoing since 2011 and will conclude in 2021 and the "Long Term Follow-up Study of the St. Jude Medical Trifecta Valve" started in 2012 and will conclude in 2020. The studies will monitor patients for ten years to determine how frequently structural valve deterioration occurs. The current Canadian product information for the Trifecta valve mentions the potential for "structural deterioration". The Warnings section of this document provides a list of factors that may place patients at greater risk of having their Trifecta valve wear down because of calcium build-up (calcific degeneration). At the time of the review, the product information did not include specific guidelines for when or how healthcare professionals should follow-up with patients, and did not state how long the device should last. The American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Guideline for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease provides recommendationsFootnote 4 for following up with patients that have prosthetic heart valve implants. Conclusions and Actions As a result of a safety review, Health Canada considered updating the product information for the Trifecta valve regarding the potential of early wear. However, given longer-term studies are ongoing Health Canada will await these results before finalizing any updates to the product information. Health Canada will monitor safety information regarding the durability of the Trifecta heart valve as it becomes available, including the manufacturer's 10-year long patient studies and other patient safety reports on an annual basis. Health Canada will take appropriate and timely action if and when any new health risks are identified. Additional Information The analysis that contributed to this safety review included scientific and medical literature, Canadian and international safety information and what is known about the use of this device both in Canada and internationally. For additional information, contact the Marketed Health Products Directorate. References Footnote 1 Piñon M., Duran D., Pazos P., and Pradas G. Leaflet tear in a Trifecta aortic bioprosthesis 34 months after implantation. Interact. Cardiovasc. Thorac. Surg. 20:281-282 (2015). Return to footnote1 referrer Footnote 2 Azarnoush K. et al. Comparison between three types of stented pericardial aortic valves (Trivalve trial): study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials 14:413 (2013). Return to footnote2 referrer Footnote 3 Cremer P.C. et al. Early Bioprosthetic Valve Failure: Mechanistic Insights via Correlation between Echocardiographic and Operative Findings. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 28:1131-1148 (2015). Return to footnote3 referrer Footnote 4 Nishimura R.A. et al. 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 63:e57-e185 (2014). Return to footnote4 referrer Page details Date modified: 2016-08-15 Section Menu Safety Reviews The Summary Safety Review - Non-prescription fluconazole – Assessing potential risks to pregnancy outcomes Summary Safety Review - ABILIFY and ABILIFY MAINTENA (aripiprazole) - Evaluating the Risk of Certain Impulse Control Behaviours Summary Safety Review - Antidepressants - Assessing the Potential Risk of Serious Eye Disorder (Angle-Closure Glaucoma) Summary Safety Review - Atypical antipsychotics - Assessing the Potential Risk of Sleep Apnoea Summary Safety Review - Atypical antipsychotics - Assessing the Potential Risk of Urinary Retention Summary Safety Review - Hydroxyzine (ATARAX and generics) - Assessing the Potential Risk of Abnormal Heart Rhythm Summary Safety Review - Over-the-counter topical acne products containing either BENZOYL PEROXIDE or SALICYLIC ACID - Assessing the potential risk of serious allergic reactions (serious hypersensitivity reactions) Summary Safety Review - Bisphosphonates - Assessing the Potential Risk of Severe Bone Damage (osteonecrosis) Summary Safety Review - Celecoxib - Assessing the Risk of Serious Heart and Stroke Side Effects at High Doses Relative to Other Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) Summary Safety Review - Topical Antiseptic Non-Prescription Chlorhexidine Products - Assessing the Potential Risk of Serious Allergic Reactions (hypersensitivity reactions) Summary Safety Review - Codeine-containing products - Further Assessing the Risk of Serious Breathing Problems in Children and Adolescents Summary Safety Review - CODEINE PRESCRIPTION PRODUCTS Indicated for Cough - Further Assessing the Risk of Serious Breathing Problems in Children and Adolescents Summary Safety Review - Denosumab (Prolia and Xgeva) - Hearing loss and deafness Summary Safety Review - DICLECTIN (doxylamine and pyridoxine combination) - Assessing Safety in pregnancy Summary Safety Review - Lanoxin, Toloxin, Apo-digoxin, PMS-digoxin, (Digoxin) - Assessing the Potential Higher Risk of Death Compared to Patients not Using Digoxin Summary Safety Review - ESSURE Permanent Birth Control System - Assessing the Risk of Complications and the Potential Need for Device Removal Summary Safety Review - EYLEA (aflibercept) - Assessing the Risk of Side Effects Outside the Eye (systemic side effects) Summary Safety Review - Propecia (finasteride 1 mg) and Proscar (finasteride 5 mg) - Assessing the Potential Risk of Seizures Summary Safety Review - Finasteride - Assessing the Potential Risk of Suicidal Thoughts and Behaviour (Suicidality) Summary Safety Review - Fluoroquinolones - Assessing the potential risk of persistent and disabling side effects Summary Safety Review - Oral FLUOROQUINOLONES - Assessing the Potential Risk of Retinal Detachment Summary Safety Review - Gabapentin - Assessing the Potential Risk of Serious Breathing Problems Summary Safety Review - GARDASIL (Quadrivalent Human Papillomavirus [Types 6, 11, 16, 18] Recombinant Vaccine) - Assessing General Safety with a Focus on Autoimmune and Cardiovascular Diseases Summary Safety Review - Hydrocodone-containing products - Assessing the Risk of Serious Breathing Problems (respiratory depression) in Children and Adolescents About Health Product Surveillance Summary Safety Review - INTUNIV XR (guanfacine hydrochloride) - Assessing the Potential Risk of Raynaud's Phenomenon Summary Safety Review - KEPPRA (levetiracetam) - Assessing the Potential Risk of Acute Kidney Injury (Acute renal failure/Interstitial nephritis) Summary Safety Review - Levetiracetam and Methotrexate - Assessing the Potential Risk of Drug-Drug Interaction Summary Safety Review - Viscous Lidocaine 2% - Assessing the Potential Risk of Severe Side Effects in Infants and Young Children Summary Safety Review - Alpha Lipoic Acid - Assessing the Potential Risk of Low Blood Sugar (Hypoglycemic Episodes) Summary Safety Review - Loratadine - Abnormal heart rhythm (QT interval prolongation) Summary Safety Review - MELATONIN (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) - Review of the Safety of Melatonin in Children and Adolescents Summary Safety Review - Phenylephrine and acetaminophen - Drug-drug interaction Summary Safety Review - Proton Pump Inhibitors - Assessing the Potential Risk of Clostridium difficile Infection Summary Safety Review - Over-the-Counter Products Containing Pseudoephedrine - Assessing the Potential Risk of Inflammation and Injury of the Large Intestine due to Insufficient Blood Supply (ischemic colitis) Summary Safety Review - Oral Retinoid Products - Assessing the Potential Risk of Impotence (erectile dysfunction) Summary Safety Review - SGLT2 Inhibitors (canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin) - Assessing the Risk of the Body Producing High Levels of Acids in the Blood (diabetic ketoacidosis) Summary Safety Review - SGLT2 Inhibitors (canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin) - Assessing the Potential Risk of Bone-Related Side Effects Summary Safety Review - Sodium Glucose Cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) Inhibitors INVOKANA (canagliflozin) and FORXIGA (dapagliflozin) - Evaluation of a Potential Risk of Acute Kidney Injury Summary Safety Review - Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) - Assessing the Potential Risk of Autism Summary Safety Review - Strontium - Risk of Heart and Circulatory Side Effects Summary Safety Review - Over-the-Counter Topical Pain Relievers Containing Menthol, Methyl Salicylate or Capsaicin - Assessing the Risk of Serious Skin Burns Summary Safety Review - Tramadol-containing Products - Assessing the Potential Risk of Serious Breathing Problems (Respiratory Depression) in Children and Adolescents Summary Safety Review - Trifecta Heart Valve - Assessing the Potential Risk of Early Wear Summary Safety Review - ULORIC (febuxostat) - Assessing a Possible Risk of Drug Reaction/Rash with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS) Summary Safety Review - ZOFRAN (ondansetron) - Assessing the Potential Harm to the Fetus summary safety review - TECFIDERA - assessing the potential risk of kidney injury Summary Safety Review - Dipeptidylpeptidase-4 Inhibitors Summary Safety Review - Finasteride - Assessing the Potential Risk of Serious Muscle-Related Side Effects Summary Safety Review - AUBAGIO (teriflunomide) - Assessing the potential risk of inflammation of the colon (colitis) Summary Safety Review - Intraocular lenses - Assessing the potential risk of developing small pockets of liquid in intraocular lenses (glistening) Summary Safety Review - Ear and Forehead (contact) Infrared Thermometers (various brands) - Assessing the potential risk of inaccuracy in children under 2 years old Summary Safety Review - Green tea extract-containing natural health products - Assessing the potential risk of liver injury (hepatotoxicity) Summary Safety Review - Atypical antipsychotics - Assessing the potential risk of sleep walking and sleep-related eating disorder MedEffect Canada safety and effectiveness reviews Summary Safety Review - Breast Implants - Assessing the potential risk of cancer (Breast implant associated-anaplastic large cell lymphoma) Summary Safety Review - Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs) - Assessing the risk of a type of skin reaction [Subacute Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus (SCLE)] Summary Safety Review - Benzodiazepines and barbiturates - assessing the potential risk to children's brains Summary Safety Review - SGLT2 inhibitors - Assessing the potential risk of a rare brain condition (posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome) in patients who have developed high levels of acids in the blood (diabetic ketoacidosis) Summary Safety Review - Clozapine - Assessing the effectiveness of monitoring for low numbers of white blood cells Summary Safety Review - Omnipod Insulin Management System - Assessing the potential risk of malfunctions with the device Summary Safety Review - PRADAXA (dabigatran etexilate) - Assessing the potential risk of liver injury Summary Safety Review - Atypical antipsychotics - Assessing the potential risk of Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS) Summary Safety Review - Gadolinium based contrast agents - Assessing the risk of gadolinium build-up in the brain and potential brain and nervous system (neurological) side effects About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy